[YOU KNOW] FREUD’S QUOTATION: “Acheronta movebo.” 1 Well, I
would like to take the theme for this year’s lectures from another, less
well-known quotation from someone who, generally speaking at least, is
also less well-known, the English Statesman Walpole, 2 who, with refer-
ence to his way of governing, said: “Quieta non movere,” 3 “Let sleeping
dogs lie.”* In a sense, this is the opposite of Freud. In fact, this year I
would like to continue with what I began to talk about last year, that is
to say, to retrace the history of what could be called the art of govern-
ment. You recall the strict sense in which I understood “art of govern-
ment,” since in using the word “to govern” I left out the thousand and
one different modalities and possible ways that exist for guiding men,
* Foucault gives the French translation of the Latin phrase as: “À ce qui reste tranquille il ne
faut pas toucher” (or “Do not disturb what is at rest or settled”)2
t h e b i rt h o f b i o p o l i t i c s
directing their conduct, constraining their actions and reactions, and so
on. Thus I left to one side all that is usually understood, and that for a
long time was understood, as the government of children, of families, of
a household, of souls, of communities, and so forth. I only considered,
and again this year will only consider the government of men insofar as
it appears as the exercise of political sovereignty.
So, “government” in the strict sense, but also “art,” “art of govern-
ment” in the strict sense, since by “art of government” I did not mean
the way in which governors really governed. I have not studied and do
not want to study the development of real governmental practice by
determining the particular situations it deals with, the problems raised,
the tactics chosen, the instruments employed, forged, or remodeled, and
so forth. I wanted to study the art of governing, that is to say, the rea-
soned way of governing best and, at the same time, reflection on the best
possible way of governing. That is to say, I have tried to grasp the level of
reflection in the practice of government and on the practice of govern-
ment. In a sense, I wanted to study government’s consciousness of itself,
if you like, although I don’t like the term “self-awareness (conscience de
soi)” and will not use it, because I would rather say that I have tried, and
would like to try again this year to grasp the way in which this practice
that consists in governing was conceptualized both within and outside
government, and anyway as close as possible to governmental practice. I
would like to try to determine the way in which the domain of the prac-
tice of government, with its different objects, general rules, and overall
objectives, was established so as to govern in the best possible way. In
short, we could call this the study of the rationalization of governmental
practice in the exercise of political sovereignty.
This immediately entails a choice of method that one day I will
finally try to come back to at greater length, but I would like to point
out straightaway that choosing to talk about or to start from govern-
mental practice is obviously and explicitly a way of not taking as a pri-
mary, original, and already given object, notions such as the sovereign,
sovereignty, the people, subjects, the state, and civil society, that is to say,
all those universals employed by sociological analysis, historical analysis,
and political philosophy in order to account for real governmental prac-
tice. For my part, I would like to do exactly the opposite and, starting10 January 1979
3
from this practice as it is given, but at the same time as it reflects on
itself and is rationalized, show how certain things—state and society,
sovereign and subjects, etcetera—were actually able to be formed, and
the status of which should obviously be questioned. In other words,
instead of deducing concrete phenomena from universals, or instead of
starting with universals as an obligatory grid of intelligibility for certain
concrete practices, I would like to start with these concrete practices
and, as it were, pass these universals through the grid of these practices.
This is not what could be called a historicist reduction, for that would
consist precisely in starting from these universals as given and then
seeing how history inflects them, or alters them, or finally invalidates
them. Historicism starts from the universal and, as it were, puts it
through the grinder of history. My problem is exactly the opposite. I
start from the theoretical and methodological decision that consists in
saying: Let’s suppose that universals do not exist. And then I put the
question to history and historians: How can you write history if you do
not accept a priori the existence of things like the state, society, the
sovereign, and subjects? It was the same question in the case of madness.
My question was not: Does madness exist? My reasoning, my method,
was not to examine whether history gives me or refers me to something
like madness, and then to conclude, no, it does not, therefore madness
does not exist. This was not the argument, the method in fact. The
method consisted in saying: Let’s suppose that madness does not exist.
If we suppose that it does not exist, then what can history make of these
different events and practices which are apparently organized around
something that is supposed to be madness? 4 So what I would like to
deploy here is exactly the opposite of historicism: not, then, questioning
universals by using history as a critical method, but starting from the
decision that universals do not exist, asking what kind of history we can
do. I will come back to this at greater length later. 5
You recall that last year I tried to study one of those important
episodes in the history of government. Roughly, this episode was that of
the organization of what was called at the time raison d’État, in an infi-
nitely stronger, stricter, more rigorous, and also fuller sense than was
later given to this notion. 6 I tried to locate the emergence of a particular
type of rationality in governmental practice, a type of rationality that4
t h e b i rt h o f b i o p o l i t i c s
would enable the way of governing to be modeled on something called
the state which, in relation to this governmental practice, to this calcu-
lation of governmental practice, plays the role both of a given—since one
only governs a state that is already there, one only governs within the
framework of a state—but also, at the same time, as an objective to be
constructed. The state is at once that which exists, but which does not
yet exist enough. Raison d’État is precisely a practice, or rather the ration-
alization of a practice, which places itself between a state presented as
given and a state presented as having to be constructed and built. The
art of government must therefore fix its rules and rationalize its way of
doing things by taking as its objective the bringing into being of what
the state should be. What government has to do must be identified with
what the state should be. Governmental ratio is what will enable a given
state to arrive at its maximum being in a considered, reasoned, and cal-
culated way. What is it to govern? To govern according to the principle of
raison d’État is to arrange things so that the state becomes sturdy and
permanent, so that it becomes wealthy, and so that it becomes strong in
the face of everything that may destroy it.
A few words on what I tried to say last year, by way of a summary of
last year’s lectures. I would like to emphasize two or three points. First,
you recall that the characteristic feature of this new governmental ration-
ality of raison d’État, which was broadly formed during the sixteenth
century, was that it defined the state and separated it out as both a
specific and an autonomous, or relatively autonomous, reality. That is to
say, government of the state must obviously respect a number of princi-
ples and rules which are above or dominate the state and are external to
it. The government of the state must respect divine, moral, and natural
laws as laws which are not homogeneous with or intrinsic to the state.
But while respecting these laws, government has to do something other
than ensure the salvation of its subjects in the hereafter, whereas in the
Middle Ages the sovereign was commonly defined as someone who must
help his subjects gain their salvation in the next world. Henceforth,
government of the state no longer has to concern itself with the salvation
of its subjects in the hereafter, at least not directly. It no longer has to
extend its paternal benevolence over its subjects or establish father-child
relationships with them, whereas in the Middle Ages the sovereign’s10 January 1979
5
paternal role was always very emphatic and marked. In other words, the
state is not a household, a church, or an empire. The state is a specific
and discontinuous reality. The state exists only for itself and in relation
to itself, whatever obedience it may owe to other systems like nature or
God. The state only exists through and for itself, and it only exists in
the plural. That is to say, there is nothing like an imperial structure
which it has to merge with or submit to at a more or less distant point
on the historical horizon and which would in some way represent God’s
theophany in the world, leading men to a finally united humanity on
the threshold of the end of the world. So there is no integration of the
state in the Empire. The state only exists as states, in the plural.
Specificity and plurality of the state. I tried to show you how this
specific plurality of the state was embodied in a number of precise ways
of governing with their correlative institutions. First, on the economic
side, was mercantilism, that is to say, a form of government. Mercantilism
is not an economic doctrine; it is something much more than and very
different from an economic doctrine. It is a particular organization of
production and commercial circuits according to the principle that:
first, the state must enrich itself through monetary accumulation;
second, it must strengthen itself by increasing population; and third, it
must exist and maintain itself in a state of permanent competition with
foreign powers. The second way for government according to raison d’État
to organize and embody itself in a practice is internal management, that
is to say, what at the time was called police, or the unlimited regulation
of the country according to the model of a tight-knit urban organization.
Finally, third, is the development of a permanent army along with a
permanent diplomacy: the organization, if you like, of a permanent
military-diplomatic apparatus with the objective of keeping the plural-
ity of states free from imperial absorption in such a way that an equilib-
rium can be established between them without the production of
imperial types of unification across Europe.
So, we have mercantilism with the police state and European balance:
all of this was the concrete body of this new art of government organized
in terms of the principle of raison d’État. These are three interdependent
ways of governing in accordance with a rationality whose principle and
domain of application is the state. I tried to show you through this that6
t h e b i rt h o f b i o p o l i t i c s
the state is far from being a kind of natural-historical given which
develops through its own dynamism like a “cold monster” 7 whose seed
having been sown at a given moment has gradually eaten away at history.
The state is not a cold monster; it is the correlative of a particular way of
governing. The problem is how this way of governing develops, what its
history is, how it expands, how it contracts, how it is extended to a par-
ticular domain, and how it invents, forms, and develops new practices.
This is the problem, and not making [the state]* a puppet show police-
man overpowering the different figures of history.
Several comments on this subject. First of all, I think there is a
distinctive feature of this art of government organized in terms of raison
d’État which is important for understanding what comes after. This is that
in its foreign policy, let’s say in its relations with other states, the state, or
rather government according to raison d’État, has a limited objective in
comparison with the ultimate horizon, the project and desire of most
sovereigns and governments in the Middle Ages to occupy the imperial
position with regard to other states so that one will have a decisive role
both in history and in the theophany. Raison d’État, on the other hand,
accepts that every state has its interests and consequently has to defend
these interests, and to defend them absolutely, but the state’s objective
must not be that of returning to the unifying position of a total and global
empire at the end of time. It must not dream that one day it will be the
empire of the last day. Each state must limit its objectives, ensure its inde-
pendence, and ensure that its forces are such that it will never be in an
inferior position with respect to the set of other countries, or to its neigh-
bors, or to the strongest of all the other countries (there are different
theories of European balance at this time, but that’s not important here).
In any case, this external self-limitation is the distinctive feature of raison
d’État as it manifests itself in the formation of the military-diplomatic
apparatuses of the seventeenth century. From the Treaty of Westphalia to
the Seven Years War, or to the revolutionary wars that introduce a com-
pletely different dimension, military-diplomatic policy is organized by
reference to the principle of the state’s self-limitation, to the principle of
the necessary and sufficient competition between different states.
* An evident slip. Foucault says: history10 January 1979
7
On the other hand, what is entailed by what we will now call inter-
nal policy, by the police state? Well, it entails precisely an objective or
set of objectives that could be described as unlimited, since for those
who govern in the police state it is not only a matter of taking into
account and taking charge of the activity of groups and orders, that is to
say, of different types of individuals with their particular status, but also
of taking charge of activity at the most detailed, individual level. All the
great seventeenth and eighteenth century treatises of police that collate
and try to systematize the different regulations are in agreement on this
and say explicitly: The object of police is almost infinite. That is to say,
when it is a question of an independent power facing other powers,
government according to raison d’État has limited objectives. But there is
no limit to the objectives of government when it is a question of manag-
ing a public power that has to regulate the behavior of subjects.
Competition between states is precisely the hinge connecting these
limited and unlimited objectives, because it is precisely so as to be able
to enter into competition with other states, that is to say, maintain an
always uneven, competitive equilibrium with other states, that govern-
ment [has to regulate the life of] its subjects, to regulate their economic
activity, their production, the price [at which] they sell goods and the
price at which they buy them, and so on [ ... ]. The correlative of this
limitation of the international objective of government according to
raison d’État, of this limitation in international relations, is the absence
of a limit in the exercise of government in the police state.
The second remark I would like to make about the functioning of
raison d’État in the seventeenth century and at the start of the eighteenth
century is that while there is no limit to the internal objectives of
government according to raison d’État, or of the police state, this does not
mean that there are no compensating mechanisms, or rather a number of
positions that form the basis for trying to establish a boundary or fron-
tier to the unlimited objective prescribed to the police state by raison
d’État. There were, of course, a number of ways in which theology was
called upon to fix limits to raison d’État, but what I would like to
emphasize is another principle of limitation at this time, and this is law.
In actual fact, something curious took place. What fundamentally was
the basis for the growth of royal power in the Middle Ages? It was, of8
t h e b i rt h o f b i o p o l i t i c s
course, the army. The growth of royal power was also based on judicial
institutions. It was as the keystone of a state of justice, of a system of jus-
tice, doubled by a military system, that the king gradually reduced the
complex interplay of feudal powers. Throughout the Middle Ages, judi-
cial practice was a multiplier of royal power. Now when this new gov-
ernmental rationality develops in the sixteenth century, and especially
from the start of the seventeenth century, law provides the basis for any-
one who wants to limit in one way or another this indefinite extension of
raison d’État that is becoming embodied in a police state. Legal theory and
judicial institutions no longer serve as the multiplier, but rather as the
subtractor of royal power. Thus, from the sixteenth century and through-
out the seventeenth century we see the development of a series of prob-
lems, polemics, and battles around, for example, fundamental laws of the
realm that jurists argue, against raison d’État, cannot be called into ques-
tion by governmental practice or raison d’État. These fundamental laws
exist, as it were, before the state, since they are constitutive of the state,
and so, some jurists say, the king, however absolute his power, must not
tamper with them. The law constituted by these fundamental laws thus
appeared to be outside raison d’État and a principle of its limitation.
There is also the theory of natural law and the assertion of impre-
scriptible natural rights that a sovereign may not transgress under any
circumstances. Then there is the theory of the contract that individuals
enter into in order to constitute a sovereign and which contains clauses
to which he must abide, since it is precisely on completion of this
contract, and of the clauses formulated in it, that the sovereign becomes
sovereign. In England, more than in France, there is the theory of an
agreement established between sovereign and subjects in order to con-
stitute a state and on completion of which the sovereign is committed to
doing some things and not others. There is also a whole part of this
historical-juridical reflection, which I spoke about two or three years ago,
I no longer remember when exactly, 8 in which there was the historical
claim that for a long time royal power was far from having been an
absolute government, that the reason that reigned and was established
between the sovereign and his subjects was not at all raison d’État, but
was rather a sort of transaction between, for example, the nobility and
the military leader whom they had charged with the functions of10 January 1979
9
military chief during, and maybe for a short while after, a period of war.
The king would be the outcome of this kind of situation of original law,
later abusing this situation in order to overturn these historically origi-
nal laws that must now be rediscovered.
Anyway, these discussions of law, their liveliness, and what’s more the
development of all the problems and theories of what could be called pub-
lic law, the reappearance of the themes of natural law, original law, the
contract, and so forth, which were formulated in the Middle Ages in a
completely different context, are all in a way the other side and conse-
quence, and the reaction against, this new way of governing on the basis of
raison d’État. In fact, law and the judicial institutions intrinsic to the
development of royal power now become, as it were, external and excessive
in relation to government exercised according to raison d’État. It is not sur-
prising that all these problems of law are always formulated, in the first
place at least, by those opposed to the new system of raison d’État. In
France, for example, it is members of the parlements, protestants, and the
nobility who take up the historical-juridical aspect. In England it is the
bourgeoisie against the absolute monarchy of the Stuarts, and religious
dissidents from the start of the seventeenth century. In short, the opposi-
tion always makes a legal objection to raison d’État and consequently uses
juridical reflection, legal rules, and legal authority against it. In a word,
let’s say that in the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries public law is
oppositional,* although it is true that some theorists favorable towards
royal power took up the problem and tried to integrate questions of law,
legal questioning, within raison d’État and its justification. Anyway, I
think we should keep it in mind that even if it is true that raison d’État
formulated and manifested as the police state, embodied in the police
state, has unlimited objectives, it is also the case that in the sixteenth and
seventeenth centuries there are constant attempts to limit raison d’État,
and the principle or reason of this limitation is found in juridical reason.
But you can see that it is an external limitation. Moreover, the jurists are
fully aware that their question of law is extrinsic to raison d’État insofar as
this is precisely that which exceeds the legal domain.
* The manuscript clarifies, p. 10: “(except in the German states, which had to be legally
founded against the Empire).”10
t h e b i rt h o f b i o p o l i t i c s
External legal limits to the state, to raison d’État, means first of all that
the limits one tries to impose on raison d’État are those that come from
God, or those which were laid down once and for all at the origin, or those
which were formulated in the distant past of history. Saying that they are
extrinsic to raison d’État also means that they function in a purely restric-
tive, dramatic way, since basically the law will only object to raison d’État
when the latter crosses these legal limits, at which point the law will be
able to define the government as illegitimate, to argue against its encroach-
ments, and if necessary to release subjects from their duty of obedience.
Broadly speaking, this is how I tried to describe this way of govern-
ing called raison d’État. I would now like to place myself around the
middle of the eighteenth century—with the qualification that I will talk
about in a moment—when Walpole said: “quieta non movere” (“let sleep-
ing dogs lie”). I think it is around this time that we are forced to note
an important transformation that in a general way will be a characteris-
tic feature of what could be called modern governmental reason. In what
does this transformation consist? Well, in a word, it consists in estab-
lishing a principle of limitation that will no longer be extrinsic to the
art of government, as was law in the seventeenth century, [but] intrin-
sic to it: an internal regulation of governmental rationality. What is this
internal regulation in abstract and general terms? How can it be under-
stood before any precise and concrete historical form? What can an
internal limitation of governmental rationality be?
In the first place, it will be a de facto regulation, a de facto limitation.
That is to say, it will not be a legal limitation, although at some point
the law will have to transcribe it in the form of rules which must not be
infringed. At any rate, to say that it is a de facto limitation means that if
the government happens to push aside this limitation and go beyond the
bounds laid down for it, it will not thereby be illegitimate, it will not
have abandoned its own essence as it were, and it will not be deprived of
its basic rights. To say that there is a de facto limitation of governmental
practice means that a government that ignores this limitation will not be
an illegitimate, usurping government, but simply a clumsy, inadequate
government that does not do the proper thing.
Second, intrinsic limitation of the art of government means that, while
being a de facto limitation, it is nonetheless general. That is to say, it is not10 January 1979
11
simply a question of sorts of recommendations of prudence which point
out that in a particular circumstance it would be better not to do some-
thing, that in this or that circumstance it would be better to refrain from
intervention. No. Internal regulation means that there really is a limitation
that is general while being de facto, that is to say, that, whatever happens,
follows a relatively uniform line in terms of principles valid at all times and
in all circumstances. The problem is precisely one of defining this general
and de facto limit that government will have to impose on itself.
Third, internal limitation means that in looking for the principle of
this limitation, because we need to know what this generality depends
on, we will not seek it in the natural rights prescribed by God to all men,
for example, or in revealed Scripture, or even in the wills of subjects who
at a given moment agree to enter into society. No, the principle of this
limitation is not to be sought in what is external to government, but in
what is internal to governmental practice, that is to say, in the objectives
of government. And this limitation will then appear as one of the means,
and maybe the fundamental means, of attaining precisely these objec-
tives. To attain these objectives it may be necessary to limit governmental
action. Governmental reason does not have to respect these limits because
they are limits laid down once and for all somewhere outside, before, or
around the state. Not at all. Governmental reason will have to respect
these limits inasmuch as it can calculate them on its own account in terms
of its objectives and [the] best means of achieving them.
Fourth, this de facto, general limitation, which is effectuated in terms
of governmental practice itself, will establish, of course, a division
between what must be done and what it is advisable not to do. It will
mark out the limit of a governmental action, but this will not be drawn
in the subjects, the individuals-subjects directed by government. That is
to say, one will not try to determine a division within subjects between
one part that is subject to governmental action, and another that is defini-
tively, once and for all, reserved for freedom. In other words, this govern-
mental reason does not divide subjects between an absolutely reserved
dimension of freedom and another dimension of submission which is
either consented to or imposed. In fact, the division is not made within
individuals, men, or subjects, but in the very domain of governmental
practice, or rather within governmental practice itself, between the12
t h e b i rt h o f b i o p o l i t i c s
operations that can be carried out and those that cannot, between what
to do and the means to use on the one hand, and what not to do on the
other. The problem, therefore, is not: Where are the basic rights, and how
do they separate the domain of fundamental freedom from the domain of
possible governmentality? The dividing line is established between two
sets of things that Bentham listed in one of his most important texts
(to which I will try to return): 9 the division between the agenda and the
non-agenda, between what to do and what not to do.
Fifth, this limitation is therefore a de facto, general limitation, a limi-
tation in terms of the objectives of government that does not divide the
subjects but the things to be done, and it is not those who govern who,
in complete sovereignty and full reason, will decide on this internal limi-
tation.* Inasmuch as the government of men is a practice which is not
imposed by those who govern on those who are governed, but a practice
that fixes the definition and respective positions of the governed and
governors facing each other and in relation to each other, “internal regu-
lation” means that this limitation is not exactly imposed by either one
side or the other, or at any rate not globally, definitively, and totally, but
by, I would say, transaction, in the very broad sense of the word, that is
to say, “action between,” that is to say, by a series of conflicts, agree-
ments, discussions, and reciprocal concessions: all episodes whose effect
is finally to establish a de facto, general, rational division between what
is to be done and what is not to be done in the practice of governing.
In a word, the principle of right—whether historically or theoreti-
cally defined doesn’t matter here—previously confronted the sovereign
and what he could do with a certain limit: You will not step over this
line, you will not infringe this right, and you will not violate this basic
freedom. At this time the principle of right balanced raison d’État with
an external principle. Let’s say that now we enter—you can see it quite
clearly—an age of critical governmental reason. You can see that this crit-
ical governmental reason, or internal criticism of governmental reason,
no longer revolves around the question of right and the question of the
sovereign’s usurpation or legitimacy. It will no longer have that kind of
penal appearance that public law still had in the sixteenth and seventeenth
* M.F.: will decide themselves on what is to be done and what is not to be done.10 January 1979
13
centuries when it said: If the sovereign breaks this law, then he must be
punished by a sanction of illegitimacy. The whole question of critical
governmental reason will turn on how not to govern too much. 10 The
objection is no longer to the abuse of sovereignty but to excessive gov-
ernment. And it is by reference to excessive government, or at any rate
to the delimitation of what would be excessive for a government, that it
will be possible to gauge the rationality of governmental practice.
Before giving this abstract description, I said that this fundamental
transformation in the relations between law and governmental practice,
this emergence of an internal limitation of governmental reason could be
located roughly around the middle of the eighteenth century. What per-
mitted its emergence? How did it come about? Obviously, we should
take into account an entire, comprehensive transformation (I will come
back to this, at least partially, afterwards), but today I would just like to
indicate the intellectual instrument, the form of calculation and ration-
ality that made possible the self-limitation of governmental reason as a
de facto, general self-regulation which is intrinsic to the operations of
government and can be the object of indefinite transactions. Well, once
again, the intellectual instrument, the type of calculation or form of
rationality that made possible the self-limitation of governmental reason
was not the law. What is it, starting from the middle of the eighteenth
century? Obviously, it is political economy.
The very ambiguities of the term “political economy,” and of its mean-
ing at this time, indicate what was basically at issue in all this, since you
know that between 1750 and 1810–1820 the expression “political econ-
omy” oscillates between two semantic poles. Sometimes this expression
aims at a particular strict and limited analysis of the production and cir-
culation of wealth. But, in a broader and more practical sense, “political
economy” also refers to any method of government that can procure the
nation’s prosperity. And finally, political economy—the term employed
by Rousseau in his famous article in the Encyclopedia 11 —is a sort of general
reflection on the organization, distribution, and limitation of powers in a
society. I think that fundamentally it was political economy that made it
possible to ensure the self-limitation of governmental reason.
Why and how did political economy make this possible? Here
again—I will go into a bit more detail later—I would just like to indicate14
t h e b i rt h o f b i o p o l i t i c s
some points which I think are indispensable for understanding the set
of things I want to talk about this year. First, unlike sixteenth and seven-
teenth century juridical thought, political economy was not developed
outside raison d’État. It was not developed against raison d’État and in
order to limit it, at least not in the first place. Rather, it was formed
within the very framework of the objectives set for the art of government
by raison d’État, for what objectives did political economy set itself? Well,
it set itself the objective of the state’s enrichment. Its objective was the
simultaneous, correlative, and suitably adjusted growth of population
on the one hand, and means of subsistence on the other. Political econ-
omy offered to ensure suitable, adjusted, and always favorable competi-
tion between states. It proposed precisely the maintenance of an
equilibrium between states such that competition can take place. That is
to say, it took up exactly the objectives of raison d’État and the police
state that mercantilism and the European balance had tried to realize.
So, to start with, political economy lodges itself within the governmen-
tal reason of the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries and to that extent
is not in the kind of external position occupied by juridical thought.
Second, political economy does not put itself forward as an external
objection to raison d’État and its political autonomy since—and this will be
an historically important point—the first political consequence of the first
economic reflection to exist in the history of European thought is precisely
a consequence which goes completely against what the jurists were after and
concludes that total despotism is necessary. The first political economy was,
of course, that of the physiocrats, and you know that from the very start of
their economic analysis the physiocrats—I will come back to this—
concluded that political power must be a power without external limitation,
without external counterbalance, and without any bounds other than those
arising from itself, and this is what they called despotism. 12 Despotism is an
economic government, but an economic government which is not hemmed
in and whose boundaries are not drawn by anything but an economy which
it has itself defined and which it completely controls. It is a matter of
absolute despotism and so you can see that in that respect political economy
does not reverse the tendency marked out by raison d’État, at least not at first
or at that level, and political economy can appear to be in a direct line of
descent from a raison d’État that gave the monarch total and absolute power.10 January 1979
15
Third, on what does political economy reflect, what does it analyze? It
is not something like prior rights inscribed in human nature or in the his-
tory of a given society. Political economy reflects on governmental practices
themselves, and it does not question them to determine whether or not
they are legitimate in terms of right. It considers them in terms of their
effects rather than their origins, not by asking, for example, what author-
izes a sovereign to raise taxes, but by asking, quite simply: What will hap-
pen if, at a given moment, we raise a tax on a particular category of persons
or a particular category of goods? What matters is not whether or not this
is legitimate in terms of law, but what its effects are and whether they are
negative. It is then that the tax in question will be said to be illegitimate
or, at any rate, to have no raison d’être. The economic question is always to
be posed within the field of governmental practice, not in terms of what
may found it by right, but in terms of its effects: What are the real effects of
the exercise of governmentality? Not: What original rights can found this
governmentality? This is the third reason why political economy, in its
reflection and its new rationality, was able to find a place, if you like, within
the governmental practice and reason established in the previous epoch.
The fourth reason is that, in responding to this type of question,
political economy revealed the existence of phenomena, processes, and
regularities that necessarily occur as a result of intelligible mechanisms.
These intelligible and necessary mechanisms may, of course, be impeded
by the practices of some forms of governmentality. They may be impeded,
jammed, or obscured, but they cannot be avoided and it will not be pos-
sible to suspend them totally and definitively. In any case, they will force
a reappraisal of governmental practice. In other words, political economy
does not discover natural rights that exist prior to the exercise of
governmentality; it discovers a certain naturalness specific to the prac-
tice of government itself. The objects of governmental action have a spe-
cific nature. There is a nature specific to this governmental action itself
and this is what political economy will study. The notion* of nature will
thus be transformed with the appearance of political economy. For polit-
ical economy, nature is not an original and reserved region on which the
exercise of power should not impinge, on pain of being illegitimate.
* Foucault adds: natural and16
t h e b i rt h o f b i o p o l i t i c s
Nature is something that runs under, through, and in the exercise of
governmentality. It is, if you like, its indispensable hypodermis. It is the
other face of something whose visible face, visible for the governors, is
their own action. Their action has an underside, or rather, it has
another face, and this other face of governmentality, its specific necessity,
is precisely what political economy studies. It is not background, but a
permanent correlative. Thus, the économistes explain, the movement of
population to where wages are highest, for example, is a law of nature; it
is a law of nature that customs duty protecting the high price of the
means of subsistence will inevitably entail something like dearth.
Finally, the last point explaining how and why political economy was
able to appear as the first form of this new self-limiting governmental ratio
is that if there is a nature specific to the objects and operations of govern-
mentality, then the consequence of this is that governmental practice can
only do what it has to do by respecting this nature. If it were to disrupt this
nature, if it were not to take it into account or go against laws determined
by this naturalness specific to the objects it deals with, it would immedi-
ately suffer negative consequences. In other words, there will be either suc-
cess or failure; success or failure, rather than legitimacy or illegitimacy, now
become the criteria of governmental action. So, success replaces [legiti-
macy].* We touch here on the whole problem of utilitarian philosophy,
which we will have to talk about. You can see how utilitarian philosophy
will be able to plug directly into these new problems of governmentality.
This is not important for the moment; we will come back to it.
Success or failure, then, will replace the division between legitimacy
and illegitimacy—but there is more. What makes a government, despite
its objectives, disrupt the naturalness specific to the objects it deals with
and the operations it carries out? What will lead it to violate this nature
despite the success it seeks? Violence, excess, and abuse? Maybe, but
ultimately these are not merely or fundamentally a matter of the wicked-
ness of the prince. What is at issue, what explains this, is precisely that
when a government violates these laws of nature, it quite simply ignores
them. It ignores them because it is unaware of their existence, mechanisms,
* M.F.: failure10 January 1979
17
and effects. In other words, governments can be mistaken. And the great-
est evil of government, what makes it a bad government, is not that the
prince is wicked, but that he is ignorant. In short, through political econ-
omy there is the simultaneous entry into the art of government of, first,
the possibility of self-limitation, that is, of governmental action limiting
itself by reference to the nature of what it does and of that on which it is
brought to bear, [and second, the question of truth].* The possibility of
limitation and the question of truth are both introduced into
governmental reason through political economy.
You will tell me that this is certainly not the first time that the ques-
tion of truth and the question of the self-limitation of governmental prac-
tice are raised. After all, what was traditionally understood by the prince’s
wisdom? The prince’s wisdom told him: I know God’s laws too well, I
know human weakness too well, and I know my own limits too well not
to restrain my power and fail to respect my subject’s right. But we can see
that the relationship between the principle of truth and the principle of
self-limitation in the prince’s wisdom is completely different from their
relationship in the emerging governmental practice that is anxious to
know the natural consequences of its actions in the objects it deals with
and manipulates. The prudent counselors who previously fixed limits of
wisdom to the prince’s presumption no longer have anything to do with
these new economic experts whose task is to tell the government what in
truth the natural mechanisms are of what it is manipulating.
So, with political economy we enter an age whose principle could be
this: A government is never sufficiently aware that it always risks gov-
erning too much, or, a government never knows too well how to govern
just enough. The principle of maximum/minimum replaces the notion
of equitable equilibrium, of “equitable justice” that previously organized
the prince’s wisdom. With this question of self-limitation by the prin-
ciple of truth, I think political economy introduced a formidable wedge
into the unlimited presumption of the police state. This is evidently a
crucial moment since it establishes, in its most important features, not
* Unfinished sentence. Manuscript p. 20: “In short, through political economy there is the
simultaneous entry into the art of government of the possibility of self-limitation and the
question of truth.”18
t h e b i rt h o f b i o p o l i t i c s
of course the reign of truth in politics, but a particular regime of truth
which is a characteristic feature of what could be called the age of poli-
tics and the basic apparatus of which is in fact still the same today. When
I say regime of truth I do not mean that at this moment politics or the
art of government finally becomes rational. I do not mean that at this
moment a sort of epistemological threshold is reached on the basis of
which the art of government could become scientific. I mean that the
moment I am presently trying to indicate is marked by the articulation
of a particular type of discourse and a set of practices, a discourse that,
on the one hand, constitutes these practices as a set bound together by
an intelligible connection and, on the other hand, legislates and can
legislate on these practices in terms of true and false.
In concrete terms this means the following. Basically, from the six-
teenth and seventeenth centuries, and even before, until the middle of
the eighteenth century, there was a whole set of practices of tax levies,
customs charges, manufacture regulations, regulations of grain prices,
the protection and codification of market practices, and so on. But what
were these practices, and how were they thought about? Well, all of this
was conceived of as the exercise of sovereign rights, of feudal rights, as
the maintenance of customs, as effective procedures of enrichment for
the Treasury, or as techniques for preventing urban revolt due to the
discontent of this or that group of subjects. In short, all of these
practices were certainly reflected on, but on the basis of different events
and principles of rationalization. From the middle of the eighteenth
century it becomes possible to establish a reasoned, reflected coherence
between these different practices going from customs charges to tax
levies, to the regulation of the market and production, and so on; a
coherence established by intelligible mechanisms which link together
these different practices and their effects, and which consequently
allows one to judge all these practices as good or bad, not in terms of a
law or moral principle, but in terms of propositions subject to the
division between true and false. Thus, in this way a whole section of
governmental activity enters into a new regime of truth with the fun-
damental effect of reconfiguring all the questions formerly posed by the
art of governing. At one time these amounted to the question: Am I
governing in proper conformity to moral, natural, or divine laws? Then,10 January 1979
19
in the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries, with raison d’État, it was:
Am I governing with sufficient intensity, depth, and attention to detail
so as to bring the state to the point fixed by what it should be, to bring
it to its maximum strength? And now the problem will be: Am I gov-
erning at the border between the too much and too little, between the
maximum and minimum fixed for me by the nature of things—I mean,
by the necessities intrinsic to the operations of government? The emer-
gence of this regime of truth as the principle of the self-limitation of
government is the object I would like to deal with this year.
The question here is the same as the question I addressed with regard
to madness, disease, delinquency, and sexuality. In all of these cases, it
was not a question of showing how these objects were for a long time
hidden before finally being discovered, nor of showing how all these
objects are only wicked illusions or ideological products to be dispelled
in the [light]* of reason finally having reached its zenith. It was a mat-
ter of showing by what conjunctions a whole set of practices—from the
moment they become coordinated with a regime of truth—was able to
make what does not exist (madness, disease, delinquency, sexuality,
etcetera), nonetheless become something, something however that con-
tinues not to exist. That is to say, what I would like to show is not how
an error—when I say that which does not exist becomes something, this
does not mean showing how it was possible for an error to be con-
structed—or how an illusion could be born, but how a particular regime
of truth, and therefore not an error, makes something that does not
exist able to become something. It is not an illusion since it is precisely
a set of practices, real practices, which established it and thus imperi-
ously marks it out in reality.
The point of all these investigations concerning madness, disease,
delinquency, sexuality, and what I am talking about now, is to show how
the coupling of a set of practices and a regime of truth form an appar-
atus (dispositif ) of knowledge-power that effectively marks out in reality
that which does not exist and legitimately submits it to the division
between true and false.
* A clear slip. M.F.: mist20
t h e b i rt h o f b i o p o l i t i c s
In the things I am presently concerned with, the moment when that
which does not exist is inscribed in reality, and when that which does not
exist comes under a legitimate regime of the true and false, marks the
birth of this dissymmetrical bipolarity of politics and the economy. Politics
and the economy are not things that exist, or errors, or illusions, or
ideologies. They are things that do not exist and yet which are inscribed
in reality and fall under a regime of truth dividing the true and the false.
This moment, whose main components I have tried to indicate, is situ-
ated between Walpole, whom I have talked about, and another text.
Walpole said: “quieta non movere” (“let sleeping dogs lie”). This is no
doubt a counsel of prudence, and we are still in the realm of the wisdom
of the prince, that is to say: When the people are peaceful, when they are
not agitating and there is no discontent or revolt, stay calm. So, wisdom
of the prince. I think he said this around the 1740s. In 1751 an anony-
mous article appeared in the Journal économique. It was in fact written by
the marquis d’Argenson, 13 who, had just given up his official activities.
Recalling what the merchant Le Gendre said to Colbert—when Colbert
asked him: “What can I do for you?” Le Gendre replied: “What can you
do for us? Leave us alone (Laissez-nous faire)” 14 —in this text to which I
will come back, 15 d’Argenson says that what he would like to do is
comment on this principle of “laissez-nous faire,” 16 because, he shows, in
economic matters this really is the essential principle which all govern-
ments must respect and follow. 17 At this moment he has laid down
clearly the principle of the self-limitation of governmental reason. But
what does “the self-limitation of governmental reason” mean? What is
this new type of rationality in the art of government, this new type of
calculation that consists in saying and telling government: I accept, wish,
plan, and calculate that all this should be left alone? I think that this is
broadly what is called “liberalism.”*
* In inverted commas in the manuscript. Foucault does not read the last pages of the manuscript
(pp. 25–32). Elements of this conclusion are taken up and developed in the next lecture.
“The word [‘liberalism’] should be understood very broadly.
1. Acceptance of the principle that somewhere there must be a limitation of government and that
this is not just an external right.
2. Liberalism is also a practice: where exactly is the principle of the limitation of government to
be found and how are the effects of this limitation to be calculated?10 January 1979
21
I thought I could do a course on biopolitics this year. I will try to
show how the central core of all the problems that I am presently try-
ing to identify is what is called population. Consequently, this is the
basis on which something like biopolitics could be formed. But it seems
to me that the analysis of biopolitics can only get under way when we
3. In a narrower sense, liberalism is the solution that consists in the maximum limitation of the
forms and domains of government action.
4. Finally, liberalism is the organization of specific methods of transaction for defining the
limitation of government practices:
—constitution, parliament
—opinion, the press
—commissions, inquiries
[p. 27] One of the forms of modern governmentality. A characteristic feature is the fact that
instead of coming up against limits formalized by jurisdictions, it [gives?] itself intrinsic limits
formulated in terms of veridiction.
a. Of course, there are not two systems, one after the other, or in insuperable conflict with each
other. Heterogeneity does not mean contradiction, but tensions, frictions, mutual incompati-
bilities, successful or failed adjustments, unstable mixtures, and so on. It also means a constantly
resumed because never completed task of establishing either a coincidence or at least a common
regime. This task is that of giving a legal form to the self-limitation that knowledge (le savoir)
prescribes to government.
[p. 28] From the eighteenth [century] to the present, this task will take two forms:
—Either, questioning governmental reason, and the necessity of its limitation, in order to iden-
tify, through what must be left free, what rights can be recognized and given status within gov-
ernmental practice. Thus, questioning the objectives, ways, and means of an enlightened and so
self-limited government can give rise to the right to property, to possible means of subsistence,
to work, etcetera.
—Or, questioning the basic rights, asserting them all and at once. And, on this basis, only
allowing a government to be formed on condition that its self-regulation reproduces all of them.
Method [crossed out: revolutionary] of governmental subordination.
[p. 29] Liberal practice adopts the method of the necessary and sufficient juridical remainder.
Revolutionary procedure adopts the method of exhaustive governmental conditions.
b. Second comment: this self-limitation of governmental reason characteristic of ‘liberalism’ has
a strange relationship with the regime of raison d’État.—The latter opens up an unlimited
domain of intervention to governmental practice, but on the other hand, through the principle
of a competitive balance between states, it gives itself limited international objectives.
—The self-limitation of governmental practice by liberal reason is accompanied by the break-up
of these international objectives and the appearance of unlimited objectives with imperialism.
[p. 30] Raison d’État was correlative with the disappearance of the imperial principle and its
replacement by competitive equilibrium between states. Liberal reason is correlative with acti-
vation of the imperial principle, not in the form of the Empire, but in the form of imperialism,
and this in connection with the principle of the free competition between individuals and
enterprises.
Chiasmus between limited and unlimited objectives with regard to the domain of internal
intervention and the field of international action.
c. Third comment: liberal reason is established as self-limitation of government on the basis of a
‘naturalness’ of the objects and practices specific to government. What is this naturalness?22
t h e b i rt h o f b i o p o l i t i c s
have understood the general regime of this governmental reason I have
talked about, this general regime that we can call the question of truth,
of economic truth in the first place, within governmental reason.
Consequently, it seems to me that it is only when we understand what
is at stake in this regime of liberalism opposed to raison d’État—or
rather, fundamentally modifying [it] without, perhaps, questioning its
bases—only when we know what this governmental regime called lib-
eralism was, will we be able to grasp what biopolitics is.
So, forgive me, for some weeks—I cannot say in advance how many—I
will talk about liberalism. In this way, it may become a bit clearer what is
at stake in this—for, after all, what interest is there in talking about liber-
alism, the physiocrats, d’Argenson, Adam Smith, Bentham, and the
English utilitarians, if not because the problem of liberalism arises for us in
our immediate and concrete actuality? What does it mean when we speak
of liberalism when we apply a liberal politics to ourselves, today, and what
relationship may there be between this and those questions of right that we
call freedoms or liberties? What is going on in all this, in today’s debate in
which Helmut Schmidt’s 18 economic principles bizarrely echo the voice of
dissidents in the East, in this problem of liberty, of liberalism? Fine, it is a
problem of our times. So, if you like, after having situated the historical
point of origin of all this by bringing out what, according to me, is the new
governmental reason from the eighteenth century, I will jump ahead and
talk about contemporary German liberalism since, however paradoxical it
may seem, liberty in the second half of the twentieth century, well let’s say
more accurately, liberalism, is a word that comes to us from Germany.
—Naturalness of wealth? Yes, but only as increasing or diminishing, stagnant or [p. 31]
circulating means of payment. But goods rather insofar as they produced, are useful and
utilized, insofar as they are exchanged between economic partners.
—It is also the naturalness of individuals. Not, however, as obedient or intractable subjects, but
insofar as they are themselves linked to this economic naturalness, insofar as their longevity,
health, and ways of conducting themselves have complex and tangled relationships with these
economic processes.
With the emergence of political economy, with the introduction of the restrictive principle in
governmental practice itself, an important substitution, or doubling rather, is carried out, since
the subjects of right on which political sovereignty is exercised appear as a population that a
government must manage.
[p. 32] This is the point of departure for the organizational line of a ‘biopolitics.’ But who does not
see that this is only part of something much larger, which [is] this new governmental reason?
Studying liberalism as the general framework of biopolitics.”10 January 1979
23
1. Quotation from Virgil, Aeneid, VIII, 312, placed as an epigraph of the Tramdeutung (Leipzig:
Deutike, 1911); English translation by James Strachey, The Interpretation of Dreams in The
Standard Edition of the Complete Psychological Works of Sigmund Freud (London: The Hogarth
Press and the Institute of Pscyho-analysis, 1958) vol. IV (First Part) p. ix, and repeated in
the text (vol. V, Second Part, p. 608, fn. 1): “Flectere si nequeo Superos, Acheronta movebo”
where it is translated as: “If I cannot bend the Higher Powers, I will move the Infernal
Regions” [or more colloquially, “I will raise hell”; G.B.]. The phrase was quoted by
Foucault, without explicit reference to Freud, in La Volonté de savoir (Paris: Gallimard,
1976) p. 103; English translation by Robert Hurley as The History of Sexuality, Vol. One: An
Introduction (New York: Pantheon, 1978; Harmondsworth: Penguin, 1984) p. 79: “In reality,
this question so often repeated nowadays, is but the recent form of a considerable affirma-
tion and a secular prescription: there is where the truth is; go see if you can uncover it.
Acheronta movebo: an age-old decision.” Before Freud, this quotation was already much
appreciated by Bismarck, who used it several times in his Pensées et Souvenirs. See C. Schmitt,
Theorie des Partisanen (Berlin: Duncker and Humblot, 1963); French translation by M.L.
Steinhauser, Théorie du partisan (Paris: Calmann-Lévy, 1972) p. 253.
2. Robert Walpole, 1st Earl of Orford (1676–1745), Whig leader who, as first Lord of the
Treasury and Chancellor of the Exchequer from 1720 to 1742, was effectively Britain’s first
Prime Minister; he governed pragmatically, using Parliamentary corruption, with the aim
of preserving political peace.
3. See Foucault’s clarification on p. 20: “I think he said it around the 1740s.” The formula is
known for being Walpole’s motto, as evidenced by various writings of his son Horace; see,
for example, Letters, VIII (London and New York: Lawrence and Bullen; G.P. Putnam’s
Sons, 1903) p. 121. See L. Stephen, History of English Thought in the Eighteenth Century
(London: Smith and Elder, 1902; reprint. Bristol: Thoemmes Antiquarian Books, 1991)
vol. 2, p. 168. The phrase comes from Sallust, De Conjuration Catilinae, 21, 1: “Postquam
accepere ea homines, quibus mala abunde monia erant, sed neque res neque spes bona ulla,
tametsi illis quieta movere magna merces videbatur ( ... )”; French translation by F. Richard,
Conjuration de Catilina (Paris: Garnier-Flammarion, 1968) p. 43; English translation by
A.W. Pollard, The Catiline of Sallust (London: Macmillan, 1928), p. 19: “These words were
listened to by men who had every evil in abundances, but no good fortune, nor any hope
of it. Great, however, as the wages of revolution appeared to them ... ”; and by J.C. Rolfe,
“The War with Catiline” in Sallust (London and Cambridge Mass.: William
Heinemann/Harvard University Press, The Loeb Classical Library, 1947) p. 39: “When
these words fell upon the ears of men who had misfortune of every kind in excess, but nei-
ther means nor any honourable hope, although disorder alone seemed to them an ample
reward ... ” It illustrates the rule of precedent in English Common Law, according to which,
in judicial matters one must keep to what has been decided and not modify what exists
(“stare decisis” and “quieta non movere”). It is also cited by F. Hayek, The Constitution of
Liberty (London: Routledge and Kegan Paul, (1960) 1976) p. 410: “Though quieta non
movere may at times be a wise maxim for the Statesman, it cannot satisfy the political
philosopher.”
4. See Paul Veyne, “Foucault révolutionne l’histoire” (1978), in Paul Veyne, Comment on écrit
l’histoire (Paris: Le Seuil, “Points Histoire,” 1979) pp. 227–230; English translation by
Catherine Porter, “Foucault Revolutionizes History” in Arnold I. Davidson, ed., Foucault
and his Interlocutors (Chicago and London: University of Chicago Press, 1997) pp. 167–170,
on methodological nominalism with regard to the phrase “madness does not exist.” In view
of the fact that Veyne’s text dates from 1978, it would seem that Foucault is here pursuing
his dialogue with the author of Le Pain et le Cirque, to which he paid tribute in the previ-
ous year’s lectures (see Sécurité, Territoire, Population. Cours au Collège de France, 1977–1978,
ed. Michel Senellart (Paris: Gallimard-Le Seuil, 2004); English translation by Graham
Burchell, Security, Territory, Population. Lectures at the Collège de France, 1977–1978, English
series ed. Arnold I. Davidson (London and New York: Palgrave Macmillan, 2007), lecture
of 8 March 1978, p. 239. See also Foucault’s comments on the same theme in the lecture
of 8 February 1978, p. 118. The criticism of universals is also reaffirmed in the
article “Foucault” which appeared in 1984 in the Dictionnaire des philosophes of24
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
11.
12.
13.
t h e b i rt h o f b i o p o l i t i c s
Denis Huismans, under the pseudonym Maurice Florens. See, M. Foucault, “Foucault” in
Dits et Écrits, 1954–1988, four volumes, eds. D. Defert and F. Ewald, with the collaboration
of J. Lagrance (Paris: Gallimard, 1994) vol. 4, p. 634; English translation by Robert Hurley,
in Essential Works of Foucault 1954–1984, volume 2: Aesthetics, Method, and Epistemology, ed.
James D. Faubion, trans. Robert Hurley and others (New York: The New Press, 1998)
p. 461: the first choice of method entailed by “the question of the relations between the
subject and truth” was “a systematic skepticism toward all anthropological universals.”
Foucault does not return to this question in the following lectures.
See Sécurité, Territoire, Population; Security, Territory, Population, lectures of 8, 15, and 22 March
1978.
See ibid. lecture of 1 February 1978; (Eng.) ibid. p. 109 and note 39.
See, “Il faut défendre la société.” Cours au Collège de France, 1975–1976, eds. M. Bertani and
A. Fontana (Paris: Gallimard-Le Seuil, 1997); English translation by David Macey, “Society
Must be Defended.” Lectures at the Collège de France, 1975–1976, English series ed. Arnold I.
Davidson (New York: Picador, 2003).
Jeremy Bentham (1748–1832), Method and Leading Features of an Institute of Political Economy
(including finance) considered not only as a science but as an art (1800–1804), in Jeremy
Bentham’s Economic Writings, ed. W. Stark (London: George Allen and Unwin, 1954) vol. 3,
pp. 305–380. It is at the end of the first part, “The Science,” in the section on “Genesis of
the Matter of Wealth,” that Bentham introduces the famous distinction between sponte acta,
agenda and non-agenda, which structures the three chapters (“Wealth,” “Population,” and
“Finance”) of the following part, “The Art.” The sponte acta are economic activities sponta-
neously developed by members of a community without any governmental intervention.
The agenda and non-agenda designate the economic activities of government according to
whether or not they increase happiness (the maximization of pleasure and minimization of
pain), which is the aim of all political action. The division of the domains between these
three classes varies according to time and place, the extension of the sponta acta being rela-
tive to a country’s level of economic development. Foucault makes another brief reference to
Bentham’s list of the agenda in the lecture of 7 March 1979 (see below p. 195), but strictly
speaking he does not speak again of the text cited (except, perhaps, indirectly at the end of
the lecture of 24 January (below p. 67), with regard to the panopticon as a general formula
of liberal government).
The formula “do not govern too much (pas trop gouverner)” is from the marquis d’Argenson
(see below, note 16). See also, B. Franklin, Principles of Trade (London: Brotherton and
Sewell, 1774, 2nd edition) p. 34: “It is said, by a very solid Writer of the same Nation, that
he is well advanced in the Science of Politics, who knows the full Force of that Maxim Pas
trop gouverner: Not to govern too strictly.” [In same section, pp. 33–34 there is following:
“When Colbert assembled some wise old Merchants of France; and desired their Advice
and Opinion, how he could best serve and promote Commerce; their answer, after
Consultation, was, in three Words only, Laissez nous faire. Let us alone.”]
This article was printed for the first time in volume 5 of the Encyclopédie pp. 337–349, which
appeared in November 1755. See Jean-Jacques Rousseau, “Économie politique,” in Œuvres
complètes (Paris: Gallimard, 1964) vol. III, pp. 241–278; English translation by G.D.H. Cole,
A Discourse on Political Economy, in The Social Contract and Discourses (London: J.M. Dent,
1993). On this text, see Sécurité, Territoire, Population; Security, Territory, Population, lecture of
1 February 1978, p. 95 and note 21.
See P.P.F.J.H. Le Mercier de La Rivière, L’Ordre naturel et essentiel des sociétés politiques (pub-
lished without the author’s name, London: Jean Nourse, and Paris: Desaint, 1767) ch. 24:
“Du despotisme legal.” The text was republished twice in the twentieth century: (i) Paris:
P. Geuthner, “Collection des économistes et des réformateurs sociaux de la France,” 1910,
and (ii) Paris: Fayard, “Corpus des œuvres de philosophie en langue française,” 2000.
René-Louis de Voyer, marquis d’Argenson (1694–1757), Secretary of State for Foreign
Affairs 1744 to 1747, the author of Mémoires et Journal, published and annotated by the
Marquis d’Argenson, Paris, 1858 (a first, very incomplete edition appeared in 1835 in the
Baudouin collection of “Mémoires sur la Révolution française”) and of Considérations sur le
gouvernement ancien et présent de la France (Amsterdam: Rey, 1764). With the abbot de Saint-
Pierre, he was one of the assiduous members of the Club de l’Entresol, opened in 1720 on10 January 1979
14.
15.
16.
17.
18.
25
the initiative of the abbot Alary and closed in 1731 by cardinal Fleury. “Laissez faire” was
already a recurring expression in the sketch of a memorandum on free trade, dated 31 July
1742 (Journal et Mémoire, ed. J.B. Rathery [Paris: Renouard, 1862] vol. IV: “Memorandum
to be written to consider the arguments for and against and to decide whether France
should allow the free entry and exit into the kingdom of all national and foreign goods”).
L.-P. Abeille, Lettre d’un négociant sur la nature du commerce des grains (Marseille: 8 October
1763); republished in Premiers opuscules sur le commerce des grains: 1763–1764, introduction
and analytical table b E. Depitre (Paris: P. Geuthner, 1911) p. 103: “I cannot end this let-
ter better except by applying particularly to the corn trade what a merchant of Rouen said
to M. Colbert on commerce in general: Laissez-nous faire.”
Foucault does not refer to this text again.
D’Argenson, “Lettre à l’auteur du Journal économique au sujet de la Dissertation sur le commerce
de M. le Marquis Belloni,” Journal économique, April 1751, pp. 107–117; republished in
G. Klotz, ed., Politique et Économie au temps des Lumières (Publications de l’Université de
Saint-Étienne, 1995) pp. 41–44: “It is told that M. Colbert gathered several delegates of
commerce at his home in order to ask them what he could do for commerce; the most rea-
sonable and least flatterer of them told him simply: Laissez-nous faire. Have we ever suffi-
ciently considered the great meaning of these words? This is only an attempt at
commentary” (p. 42). The name of Le Gendre is first mentioned in the eighteenth century
in Turgot’s L’Éloge de Gournay, written in 1759 (“We know Le Gendre’s words to Colbert:
laissez-nous faire”) in Œuvres de Turgot, ed. E. Daire (Paris: Guillaumin, 1844) vol. 1, p. 288;
Turgot, Formation et Distribution des richesses (Paris: Garnier-Flammarion) pp. 150–151.
D’Argenson is also the author of the maxim “do not govern too much (pas trop gouverner).”
See G. Weulersse, Le Mouvement physiocratique en France, de 1756 à 1770, in two volumes
(Paris: Félix Alcan, 1910) vol. 1, pp. 17–18, which quotes this extract from the tribute that
appeared in the Éphémérides du citoyen, July, 1768, p. 156: “He composed a book with the
excellent object and title: do not govern too much.” D’Argenson claims to have written a
treatise entitled Pour gouverner mieux, il faudrait gouverner moins (Mémoires et Journal, vol. V,
p. 362; quoted by A. Oncken, Die Maxime “Laissez faire et laissez passer” (Bern: K.J. Wyss,
1886) p. 58.
D’Argenson, “Lettre à l’auteur du Journal économique” p. 44: “Yes, regular and enlightened
freedom will always do more for a nation’s commerce than the most intelligent domina-
tion.” He defends the same position with regard to the grain trade in another article in the
Journal économique, May 1754, pp. 64–79: “Arguments en faveur de la liberté du commerce
des grains,” republished in G. Klotz, ed., Politique et Économie, pp. 45–54.
Helmut Schmidt (born 1918): deputy for the SPD in the Bundestag in 1953, he became
Chancellor in May 1974 after the retirement of Willy Brandt. Losing his majority, he gave
way to Helmut Kohl in 1982.This page intentionally left blanktwo
17 January 1979
[
]
Liberalism and the implementation of a new art of government in
the eighteenth century. ⵑ Specific features of the liberal art of
government (I): (1) The constitution of the market as site of the
formation of truth and not just as domain of jurisdiction. ⵑ
Questions of method. The stakes of research undertaken around
madness, the penal order, and sexuality: sketch of a history of
“regimes of veridiction.” ⵑ The nature of a political critique of
knowledge (savoir). ⵑ (2) The problem of limiting the exercise
of power by public authorities. Two types of solution: French
juridical radicalism and English utilitarianism. ⵑ The question of
“utility” and limiting the exercise of power by public authorities.
ⵑ Comment on the status of heterogeneity in history: strategic
against dialectical logic. ⵑ The notion of “interest” as operator
(opérateur) of the new art of government.
I WOULD LIKE TO refine a little the theses or hypotheses that I put
forward last week with regard to what I think is a new art of government
that began to be formulated, reflected upon, and outlined around the
middle of the eighteenth century. I think an essential characteristic of
this new art of government is the organization of numerous and complex
internal mechanisms whose function—and this is what distinguishes
them from raison d’État—is not so much to ensure the growth of the
state’s forces, wealth, and strength, to ensure its unlimited growth, as to
limit the exercise of government power internally.28
t h e b i rt h o f b i o p o l i t i c s
This art of government is certainly new in its mechanisms, its
effects, and its principle. But it is so only up to a point, because we
should not imagine that this art of government is the suppression,
obliteration, abolition, or, if you prefer, the Aufhebung of the raison
d’État I tried to talk about last week. In fact, we should not forget that
this new art of government, or this art of the least possible govern-
ment, this art of governing between a maximum and a minimum, and
rather minimum than maximum, should be seen as a sort of intensifi-
cation or internal refinement of raison d’État; it is a principle for
maintaining it, developing it more fully, and perfecting it. It is not
something other than raison d’État, an element external to and in con-
tradiction with raison d’État, but rather its point of inflection in the
curve of its development. If you like, to use a not very satisfactory
expression, I would say that it is the reason of the least state within
and as organizing principle of raison d’État itself, or again: it is the rea-
son of least government as the principle organizing raison d’État itself.
There is someone, unfortunately I’ve not been able to find his name in
my papers, but when I do I will tell you, but certainly from the end of
the eighteenth century, who spoke about “frugal government.” 1 Well, I
think that actually at this moment we are entering what could be
called the epoch of frugal government, which is, of course, not without
a number of paradoxes, since during this period of frugal government,
which was inaugurated in the eighteenth century and is no doubt still
not behind us, we see both the intensive and extensive development of
governmental practice, along with the negative effects, with the
resistances and revolts which we know are directed precisely against
the invasive intrusions of a government which nevertheless claims to
be and is supposed to be frugal. Let’s say—and this will be why we can
say that we are living in the age of frugal government—that this
extensive and intensive development of a government that is neverthe-
less supposed to be frugal has been constantly accompanied, outside
and within government, by the question of the too much and the
too little. Stretching things and giving a caricature of them, I
would say that whatever the extension and intensive development
of government there may be in fact, the question of frugality has
been at the very heart of the reflection which has revolved around17 January 1979
29
government.* The question of frugality has, if not replaced, at least
overtaken and to an extent forced back and somewhat marginalized a
different question which preoccupied political reflection in the
sixteenth and seventeenth centuries, and even up to the start of the
eighteenth century, which was the problem of the constitution.
Certainly, all the questions concerning monarchy, aristocracy, and
democracy do not disappear. But just as they were the fundamental
questions, I was going to say the royal questions, in the seventeenth
and eighteenth centuries, so starting from the end of the eighteenth
century, throughout the nineteenth century, and obviously more than
ever today, the fundamental problem is not the constitution of states,
but without a doubt the question of the frugality of government.
[The] question of the frugality of government is indeed the question of
liberalism. I would now like to take up two or three of the points I
mentioned last week in order to clarify and refine them.
Last week I tried to show you that this idea, this theme, or this regu-
lative principle rather, of frugal government was formed on the basis of
what could be called or what I roughly designated as the connecting up
of raison d’État and its calculation with a particular regime of truth that
finds its theoretical expression and formulation in political economy. I
tried to suggest that the appearance of political economy and the prob-
lem of least government were linked. But I think we should try to be a
bit clearer about the nature of this connection. When I say connecting
up of political economy with raison d’État, does this mean that political
economy put forward a particular model of government? Does it mean
that statesmen were initiated into political economy or that they began
to listen to the economists? Did the economic model become the orga-
nizing principle of governmental practice? Clearly this is not what I
wanted to say. What I meant, what I tried to designate, was something of
a rather different nature and situated at a different level. The principle
of this connection between the practice of government and a regime of
truth that I tried to identify would be this: [ ... ] there was something in
the regime of government, in the governmental practice of the sixteenth
and seventeenth centuries, and already of the Middle Ages also, that was
* Foucault adds: and which it has posed.30
t h e b i rt h o f b i o p o l i t i c s
one of the privileged objects of governmental intervention and regulation,
that was the privileged object of government vigilance and intervention.
And it is not economic theory but this place itself that from the eigh-
teenth century became a site and a mechanism of the formation of truth.
And [instead of] continuing to saturate this site of the formation of
truth with an unlimited regulatory governmentality, it is recognized—
and this is where the shift takes place—that it must be left to function
with the least possible interventions precisely so that it can both formu-
late its truth and propose it to governmental practice as rule and norm.
This site of truth is not in the heads of economists, of course, but is the
market.
Let’s put it more clearly. The market, in the very general sense of the
word, as it operated in the Middle Ages, and in the sixteenth and sev-
enteenth centuries, was, in a word, essentially a site of justice. In what
sense was it a site of justice? In several senses. In the first place it was,
of course, invested with extremely prolific and strict regulations: it was
regulated with regard to the objects brought to market, their type of
manufacture, their origin, the duties to be paid, the procedures of sale,
and, of course, the prices fixed. So, the market was a site invested with
regulations. It was also a site of justice in the sense that the sale price
fixed in the market was seen, both by theorists and in practice, as a just
price, or at any rate a price that should be the just price, 2 that is to say
a price that was to have a certain relationship with work performed,
with the needs of the merchants, and, of course, with the consumers’
needs and possibilities. The market was a site of justice to such an extent
that it had to be a privileged site of distributive justice, since as you
know, for at least some basic products, like food products, the rules of
the market operated to ensure that, if not all, then at least some of the
poorest could buy things as well as those who were more well-off. So in
this sense the market was a site of distributive justice. Finally, what was
it that essentially had to be ensured in the market, by the market, or
rather by the regulations of the market, and which makes it a site of jus-
tice? Was it the truth of prices, as we would say now? Not at all. What
had to be ensured was the absence of fraud. In other words, it was the
protection of the buyer. The aim of the regulation of the market was, on
the one hand, a distribution of goods that was as just as possible, and17 January 1979
31
then, on the other hand, the absence of theft and crime. In other words,
the market was basically seen at this time as a risk, maybe for the
merchant, but certainly for the buyer. The buyer had to be protected
against the danger of bad goods and the fraud of the person selling them.
It was necessary then to ensure the absence of fraud with regard to the
nature of the objects, their quality, and so forth. This system—regulation,
the just price, the sanction of fraud—thus meant that the market was
essentially, and really functioned as, a site of justice, a place where what
had to appear in exchange and be formulated in the price was justice.
Let’s say that the market was a site of jurisdiction.
Now this is where the change takes place for a number of reasons that
I will mention shortly. In the middle of the eighteenth century the
market no longer appeared as, or rather no longer had to be a site of
jurisdiction. On the one hand, the market appeared as something that
obeyed and had to obey “natural,”* that is to say, spontaneous mecha-
nisms. Even if it is not possible to grasp these mechanisms in their
complexity, their spontaneity is such that attempts to modify them will
only impair and distort them. On the other hand—and this is the
second sense in which the market becomes a site of truth—not only does
it allow natural mechanisms to appear, but when you allow these nat-
ural mechanisms to function, they permit the formation of a certain
price that Boisguilbert 3 will call the “natural” price, the physiocrats will
call the “good price,” 4 and that will later be called the “normal price,” 5
that is to say, a certain price—natural, good, normal, it’s not important—
which will adequately express the relationship, a definite, adequate
relationship between the cost of production and the extent of demand.
When you allow the market to function by itself according to its nature,
according to its natural truth, if you like, it permits the formation of a
certain price which will be called, metaphorically, the true price, and
which will still sometimes be called the just price, but which no longer
has any connotations of justice. It is a certain price that fluctuates
around the value of the product.
The importance of economic theory—I mean the theory constructed in
the discourse of the économistes and formed in their brains—the importance
* In inverted commas in the manuscript.32
t h e b i rt h o f b i o p o l i t i c s
of the theory of the price-value relationship is due precisely to the fact
that it enables economic theory to pick out something that will become
fundamental: that the market must be that which reveals something like
a truth. This does not mean that prices are, in the strict sense, true, and
that there are true prices and false prices. But what is discovered at this
moment, at once in governmental practice and in reflection on this
governmental practice, is that inasmuch as prices are determined in accor-
dance with the natural mechanisms of the market they constitute a stan-
dard of truth which enables us to discern which governmental practices
are correct and which are erroneous. In other words, it is the natural
mechanism of the market and the formation of a natural price that
enables us to falsify and verify governmental practice when, on the basis
of these elements, we examine what government does, the measures it
takes, and the rules it imposes. In this sense, inasmuch as it enables pro-
duction, need, supply, demand, value, and price, etcetera, to be linked
together through exchange, the market constitutes a site of veridiction, I
mean a site of verification-falsification for governmental practice. 6
Consequently, the market determines that good government is no longer
simply government that functions according to justice. The market deter-
mines that a good government is no longer quite simply one that is just.
The market now means that to be good government, government has to
function according to truth. In this history and formation of a new art of
government, political economy does not therefore owe its privileged role
to the fact that it will dictate a good type of conduct to government.
Political economy was important, even in its theoretical formulation,
inasmuch as (and only inasmuch as, but this is clearly a great deal) it
pointed out to government where it had to go to find the principle of
truth of its own governmental practice. In simple and barbaric terms,
let’s say that from being a site of jurisdiction, which it remained up to the
start of the eighteenth century, the market, through all the techniques I
discussed last year with regard to scarcity and grain markets, etcetera, 7 is
becoming what I will call a site of veridiction. The market must tell the
truth (dire le vrai); it must tell the truth in relation to governmental prac-
tice. Henceforth, and merely secondarily, it is its role of veridiction that
will command, dictate, and prescribe the jurisdictional mechanisms, or
absence of such mechanisms, on which [the market] must be articulated.17 January 1979
33
When I spoke of the coupling carried out in the eighteenth century
between a regime of truth and a new governmental reason, and the
connection of this with political economy, in no way did I mean that
there was the formation of a scientific and theoretical discourse of polit-
ical economy on one side, and then, on the other, those who governed
who were either seduced by this political economy, or forced to take it
into account by the pressure of this or that social group. What I meant
was that the market—which had been the privileged object of govern-
mental practice for a very long time and continued to be in the sixteenth
and seventeenth centuries under the regime of raison d’État and a mer-
cantilism which precisely made commerce one of the major instruments
of the state’s power—was now constituted as a site of veridiction. And
this is not simply or so much because we have entered the age of a mar-
ket economy—this is at once true, and says nothing exactly—and it is
not because people wanted to produce the rational theory of the
market—which is what they did, but it was not sufficient. In fact, in
order to reach an understanding of how the market, in its reality, became
a site of veridiction for governmental practice, we would have to estab-
lish what I would call a polygonal or polyhedral relationship between:
the particular monetary situation of the eighteenth century, with a new
influx of gold on the one hand, and a relative consistency of currencies
on the other; a continuous economic and demographic growth in the
same period; an intensification of agricultural production; the access to
governmental practice of a number of technicians who brought with
them both methods and instruments of reflection; and finally a number
of economic problems being given a theoretical form.
In other words, I do not think we need to look for—and consequently
I do not think we can find—the cause* of the constitution of the market
as an agency of veridiction. If we want to analyze this absolutely funda-
mental phenomenon in the history of Western governmentality, this
irruption of the market as a principle of veridiction, we should simply
establish the intelligibility of this process 8 by describing the connec-
tions between the different phenomena I have just referred to. This
would involve showing how it became possible—that is to say, not
* Foucault repeats the words, stressing the article: the cause34
t h e b i rt h o f b i o p o l i t i c s
showing that it was necessary, which is a futile task anyway, nor show-
ing that it is a possibility (un possible), one possibility in a determinate
field of possibilities ... Let’s say that what enables us to make reality
intelligible is simply showing that it was possible; establishing the intel-
ligibility of reality consists in showing its possibility. Speaking in general
terms, let’s say that in this history of a jurisdictional and then veridictional
market we have one of those innumerable intersections between jurisdic-
tion and veridiction that is undoubtedly a fundamental phenomenon in
the history of the modern West.
It has been around these [questions] that I have tried to organize a
number of problems—with regard to madness, for example. The prob-
lem was not to show that psychiatry was formed in the heads of psychi-
atrists as a theory, or science, or discourse claiming scientific status, and
that this was concretized or applied in psychiatric hospitals. Nor was it
to show how, at a certain moment, institutions of confinement, which
had existed for a long time, secreted their own theory and justifications
in the discourse of psychiatrists. The problem was the genesis of psych-
iatry on the basis of, and through institutions of confinement that were
originally and basically articulated on mechanisms of jurisdiction in the
very broad sense—since there were police type of jurisdictions, but for
the present, at this level, it is not very important—and which at a cer-
tain point and in conditions that precisely had to be analyzed, were at
the same time supported, relayed, transformed, and shifted by process of
veridiction.
In the same way, studying penal institutions meant studying them
first of all as sites and forms where jurisdictional practice was predomi-
nant and we can say autocratic. [It meant studying] how a certain prac-
tice of veridiction was formed and developed in these penal institutions
that were fundamentally linked to a jurisdictional practice, and how this
veridictional practice—supported, of course, by criminology, psychol-
ogy, and so on, but this is not what is essential—began to install the
veridictional question at the very heart of modern penal practice, even
to the extent of creating difficulties for its jurisdiction, which was the
question of truth addressed to the criminal: Who are you? When penal
practice replaced the question: “What have you done?” with the ques-
tion: “Who are you?” you see the jurisdictional function of the penal17 January 1979
35
system being transformed, or doubled, or possibly undermined, by the
question of veridiction.
In the same way, studying the genealogy of the object “sexuality”
through a number of institutions meant trying to identify in things like
confessional practices, spiritual direction, the medical relationship, and
so on, the moment when the exchange and cross-over took place
between a jurisdiction of sexual relations, defining the permitted and
the prohibited, and the veridiction of desire, in which the basic arma-
ture of the object “sexuality” currently appears.
You can see that all these cases—whether it is the market, the confes-
sional, the psychiatric institution, or the prison—involve taking up a
history of truth under different angles, or rather, taking up a history of
truth that is coupled, from the start, with a history of law. While the
history of error linked to a history of prohibitions has been attempted
fairly frequently, I would propose undertaking a history of truth cou-
pled with a history of law. Obviously, a history of truth should not be
understood in the sense of a reconstruction of the genesis of the true
through the elimination or rectification of errors; nor a history of the
true which would constitute a historical succession of rationalities
established through the rectification or elimination of ideologies. Nor
would this history of truth be the description of insular and
autonomous systems of truth. It would involve the genealogy of regimes
of veridiction, that is to say, the constitution of a particular right (droit)
of truth on the basis of a legal situation, the law (droit) and truth rela-
tionship finding its privileged expression in discourse, the discourse in
which law is formulated and in which what can be true or false is for-
mulated; the regime of veridiction, in fact, is not a law (loi) of truth,
[but] the set of rules enabling one to establish which statements in a
given discourse can be described as true or false.
Undertaking the history of regimes of veridiction—and not the his-
tory of truth, the history of error, or the history of ideology, etcetera—
obviously means abandoning once again that well-known critique of
European rationality and its excesses, which has been constantly taken
up in various forms since the beginning of the nineteenth century. From
romanticism to the Frankfurt School, 9 what has always been called into
question and challenged has been rationality with the weight of power36
t h e b i rt h o f b i o p o l i t i c s
supposedly peculiar to it. Now the critique* of knowledge I would pro-
pose does not in fact consist in denouncing what is continually—I was
going to say monotonously—oppressive under reason, for after all,
believe me, insanity (déraison) is just as oppressive. Nor would this
political critique of knowledge consist in flushing out the presumption
of power in every truth affirmed, for again, believe me, there is just as
much abuse of power in the lie or error. The critique I propose consists
in determining under what conditions and with what effects a veridic-
tion is exercised, that is to say, once again, a type of formulation falling
under particular rules of verification and falsification. For example,
when I say that critique would consist in determining under what con-
ditions and with what effects a veridiction is exercised, you can see that
the problem would not consist in saying: Look how oppressive psychia-
try is, because it is false. Nor would it consist in being a little more
sophisticated and saying: Look how oppressive it is, because it is true. It
would consist in saying that the problem is to bring to light the
conditions that had to be met for it to be possible to hold a discourse on
madness—but the same would hold for delinquency and for sex—that
can be true or false according to the rules of medicine, say, or of confes-
sion, psychology, or psychoanalysis.
In other words, to have political significance, analysis does not have
to focus on the genesis of truths or the memory of errors. What does it
matter when a science began to tell the truth? Recalling all the erro-
neous things that doctors have been able to say about sex or madness
does us a fat lot of good ... I think that what is currently politically
important is to determine the regime of veridiction established at a
given moment that is precisely the one on the basis of which you can
now recognize, for example, that doctors in the nineteenth century said
so many stupid things about sex. What is important is the determina-
tion of the regime of veridiction that enabled them to say and assert a
number of things as truths that it turns out we now know were perhaps
not true at all. This is the point, in fact, where historical analysis may
have a political significance. It is not so much the history of the true or
the history of the false as the history of veridiction which has a political
* The manuscript adds, p. 10bis: “political”17 January 1979
37
significance. That is what I wanted to say regarding the question of the
market or, let’s say, of the connecting up of a regime of truth to govern-
mental practice.
Now let’s consider the second question, the second point on which I
would like to refine a little what I said to you last week. I said, you recall,
that governmentality in the regime of pure raison d’État, or at least its
tendency, was interminable, without an end. In a sense, governmentality
was unlimited. This was precisely the main characteristic of what was
called at the time police and which at the end of the eighteenth century
will be called, already with a backward glance, the police state. The
police state is a government that merges with administration, that is
entirely administrative, and an administration which possesses, which
has behind it, all the weight of a governmentality.
I have tried to show how this complete governmentality, this govern-
mentality with a tendency to be unlimited, had in fact, not exactly a
limit, but a counter-weight in the existence of judicial institutions and
magistrates, and in juridical discourses focusing precisely on the
problem of the nature of the sovereign’s right to exercise his power and
the legal limits within which the sovereign’s action can be inserted. So,
governmentality was not completely unbalanced and unlimited in raison
d’État, but there was a system of two parts relatively external to each
other.
I also pointed out that in the new system of governmental reason
perfected in the eighteenth century, frugal government, or the reason of
the least state, entailed something very different. This was a limitation
on the one hand, and an internal limitation on the other. Nevertheless
we should not think that the nature of this internal limitation is com-
pletely different from law. In spite of everything it is always a juridical
limitation, the problem being precisely how to formulate this limitation
in legal terms in the regime of this new, self-limiting governmental
reason. As you can see, this is a different problem. In the old system of
raison d’État there was a governmentality with its tendency to be unlim-
ited on one side, and then a system of law opposing it from outside, but
within concrete and well-known political limits: the contrast was
between royal power [on one side], and those upholding the judicial
institution on the other. In the new system we are dealing with a different38
t h e b i rt h o f b i o p o l i t i c s
problem: How can the necessary self-limitation of governmentality be
formulated in law without government being paralyzed, and also—and
this is the real problem—without stifling the site of truth which is
exemplified by the market and which must be respected as such? In
clear terms, the problem raised at the end of the eighteenth century is
this: If there is political economy, what is its corresponding public law?
Or again: What bases can be found for the law that will structure
the exercise of power by public authorities when there is at least one
region, but no doubt others too, where government non-intervention is
absolutely necessary, not for legal, but for factual reasons, or rather, for
reasons of truth? Limited by respect for the truth, how will power, how
will government be able to formulate this respect for truth in terms of
laws which must be respected?* After all, the fact that for a long time,
until recently, faculties of law in France were also faculties of political
economy—to the great discomfort of economists and jurists—is only the
extension, no doubt excessive in historical terms, of an original fact,
which was that you could not think of political economy, that is to say,
the freedom of the market, without at the same time addressing the
problem of public law, namely that of limiting the power of public
authorities.
A number of precise and concrete things are proof of this moreover.
After all, the first economists were at the same time jurists and people
who addressed the problem of public law. Beccaria, for example, who
was a theorist of public law, basically in the form of penal law, was also
an economist. 10 You only have to read The Wealth of Nations, and not
even his other works, to see that the problem of public law runs through
all of Adam Smith’s work. 11 Bentham, a public law theorist, was at the
same time an economist and wrote books on political economy. 12 In
addition to these facts, which show the original link between the prob-
lem of political economy and the problem of limiting the power of pub-
lic authorities, there is ample proof in the problems raised during the
nineteenth and twentieth centuries concerning economic legislation, the
separation of government and administration, the constitution of
* Foucault adds: This coupling between political economy and public law, which now seems very
bizarre to us ... [unfinished sentence]17 January 1979
39
administrative law, whether specific administrative courts are needed, 13
and so on. So, when I spoke last week of the self-limitation of govern-
mental reason I was not referring to a disappearance of law, but to the
problem raised by the juridical limitation of an exercise of political
power which problems of truth were making it necessary to determine.
So, there is a shift of the center of gravity of public law. The funda-
mental problem of public law will no longer be the foundation of sover-
eignty, the conditions of the sovereign’s legitimacy, or the conditions
under which the sovereign’s rights can be exercised legitimately, as it
was in the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries. The problem becomes
how to set juridical limits to the exercise of power by a public author-
ity. Schematically, we can say that at the end of the eighteenth and the
beginning of the nineteenth century there were basically two ways of
resolving this. The first I will call the axiomatic, juridico-deductive
approach, which was, up to a point, the path taken by the French
Revolution—we could also call it Rousseau’s approach.* In what does it
consist? It does not start from government and its necessary limitation,
but from law in its classical form. That is to say, it tries to define the nat-
ural or original rights that belong to every individual, and then to define
under what conditions, for what reason, and according to what ideal or
historical procedures a limitation or exchange of rights was accepted. It
also consists in defining those rights one has agreed to cede and those,
on the other hand, for which no cession has been agreed and which thus
remain imprescriptible rights in all circumstances and under any possi-
ble government or political regime. Finally, on this basis, and only on
this basis, having thus defined the division of rights, the sphere of sov-
ereignty, and the limits of the right of sovereignty, you can then deduce
from this only what we can call the bounds of governmental competence,
but within the framework determined by the armature constituting
sovereignty itself. In other words, put clearly and simply this approach
consists in starting from the rights of man in order to arrive at the lim-
itation of governmentality by way of the constitution of the sovereign. I
would say that, broadly speaking, this is the revolutionary approach. It is
a way of posing right from the start the problem of legitimacy and the
* In the manuscript, the other way is called (p. 15), “the inductive and residual way.”40
t h e b i rt h o f b i o p o l i t i c s
inalienability of rights through a sort of ideal or real renewal of society,
the state, the sovereign, and government. Consequently, you can see that
if, historically and politically, this is the revolutionaries’ approach, we
can call it a retroactive, or retroactionary approach inasmuch as it
consists in taking up the problem of public law that the jurists had
constantly opposed to the raison d’État of the seventeenth and eighteenth
centuries. In this respect there is continuity between the seventeenth
century theorists of natural law and the jurists and legislators of the
French Revolution.
The other approach does not start from law but from governmental
practice itself. It starts from government practice and tries to analyze it
in terms of the de facto limits that can be set to this governmentality.
These de facto limits may derive from history, from tradition, or from an
historically determined state of affairs, but they can and must also be
determined as desirable limits, as it were, as the good limits to be estab-
lished precisely in terms of the objectives of governmentality, of the
objects with which it has to deal, of the country’s resources, population,
and economy, etcetera. In short, this approach consists in the analysis of
government: its practice, its de facto limits, and its desirable limits. On
this basis, it distinguishes those things it would be either contradictory
or absurd for government to tamper with. Better still, and more
radically, it distinguishes those things that it would be pointless for gov-
ernment to interfere with. Following this approach means that govern-
ment’s sphere of competence will be defined on the basis of what it
would or would not be useful for government to do or not do.
Government’s limit of competence will be bounded by the utility of gov-
ernmental intervention. The question addressed to government at every
moment of its action and with regard to each of its institutions, old or
new, is: Is it useful? For what is it useful? Within what limits is it use-
ful? When does it stop being useful? When does it become harmful?
This is not the revolutionary question: What are my original rights and
how can I assert them against any sovereign? But it is the radical ques-
tion, the question of English radicalism; the problem of English radical-
ism is the problem of utility.
Don’t think that English political radicalism is no more than the pro-
jection of a utilitarian ideology on the level of politics. It is, rather, an17 January 1979
41
attempt to define the sphere of competence of government in terms of
utility on the basis of an internal elaboration of governmental practice
which is nevertheless fully thought through and always endowed and
permeated with philosophical, theoretical, and juridical elements. In
this respect utilitarianism appears as something very different from a
philosophy or an ideology. Utilitarianism is a technology of government,
just as public law was the form of reflection, or, if you like, the juridical
technology with which one tried to limit the unlimited tendency of
raison d’État.
A comment with regard to this word “radicalism” or “radical.” The
word “radical,” which I think dates from the end of the seventeenth and
the start of the eighteenth century, was employed in England to
designate—and it is this that is quite interesting—the position of those
who, faced with the sovereign’s real or possible abuses, wanted to assert
those famous original rights supposedly possessed by the Anglo-Saxons
prior to the Norman invasion (I talked about this two or three years
ago 14 ). This is radicalism. So it consisted in the assertion of original
rights in the sense of basic rights identified by the historical reflections
of public law. However, for English radicalism, “radical” designates a
position which involves continually questioning government, and gov-
ernmentality in general, as to its utility or non-utility.
So, there are two approaches: the revolutionary approach, basically
structured around traditional positions of public law, and the radical
approach, basically structured around the new economy of government
reason. These two approaches imply two conceptions of the law. In the
revolutionary, axiomatic approach, the law will be seen as the expres-
sion of a will. So there will be a system of will-law. The problem of the
will is, of course, at the heart of all the problems of right, which again
confirms the fact that this is a fundamentally juridical problematic. The
law is therefore conceived as the expression of a collective will indicating
the part of right individuals have agreed to cede, and the part they wish
to hold on to. In the other problematic, the radical utilitarian approach,
the law is conceived as the effect of a transaction that separates the
sphere of intervention of public authorities from that of the individual’s
independence. This leads us to another distinction which is also very
important. On one side you have a juridical conception of freedom: every42
t h e b i rt h o f b i o p o l i t i c s
individual originally has in his possession a certain freedom, a part of
which he will or will not cede. On the other side, freedom is not
conceived as the exercise of some basic rights, but simply as the inde-
pendence of the governed with regard to government. We have therefore
two absolutely heterogeneous conceptions of freedom, one based on the
rights of man, and the other starting from the independence of the
governed. I am not saying that the two systems of the rights of man and
of the independence of the governed do not intertwine, but they have
different historical origins and I think they are essentially heteroge-
neous or disparate. With regard to the problem of what are currently
called human rights, we would only need look at where, in what coun-
tries, how, and in what form these rights are claimed to see that at times
the question is actually the juridical question of rights, and at others it
is a question of this assertion or claim of the independence of the
governed vis-à-vis governmentality.
So, we have two ways of constituting the regulation of public author-
ities by law, two conceptions of the law, and two conceptions of freedom.
This ambiguity is a characteristic feature of, let’s say, nineteenth and also
twentieth century European liberalism. When I say two routes, two ways,
two conceptions of freedom and of law, I do not mean two separate, dis-
tinct, incompatible, contradictory, and mutually exclusive systems, but
two heterogeneous procedures, forms of coherence, and ways of doing
things. We should keep in mind that heterogeneity is never a principle of
exclusion; it never prevents coexistence, conjunction, or connection. And
it is precisely in this case, in this kind of analysis, that we emphasize, and
must emphasize a non-dialectical logic if want to avoid being simplistic.
For what is dialectical logic? Dialectical logic puts to work contradictory
terms within the homogeneous. I suggest replacing this dialectical logic
with what I would call a strategic logic. A logic of strategy does not stress
contradictory terms within a homogeneity that promises their resolution
in a unity. The function of strategic logic is to establish the possible con-
nections between disparate terms which remain disparate. The logic of
strategy is the logic of connections between the heterogeneous and not
the logic of the homogenization of the contradictory. So let’s reject the
logic of the dialectic and try to see—this is what I will try to show in
these lectures—the connections which succeeded in holding together and17 January 1979
43
conjoining the fundamental axiomatic of the rights of man and the
utilitarian calculus of the independence of the governed.
I wanted to add something to this, but I think it would take too long;
I will come back to it later.* I would like to return for a moment to
what I said at the start with regard to the market—and it is a point to
which I will come back later. 15 Still, just now, I would like to stress that
between these two heterogeneous systems—that of the revolutionary
axiomatic, of public law and the rights of man, and that of the empiri-
cal and utilitarian approach which defines the sphere of independence of
the governed on the basis of the necessary limitation of government—
there is, of course, a ceaseless connection and a whole series of bridges,
transits, and joints. Consider the history of property rights, for
example. † But it is quite clear (I will talk about this in the lectures) that
of the two systems, one has been strong and has held out, while the
other has receded. The one that has been strong and has stood fast is, of
course, the radical approach which tried to define the juridical limita-
tion of public authorities in terms of governmental utility. This tendency
will characterize not only the history of European liberalism strictly
speaking, but the history of the public authorities in the West.
Consequently, this problem of utility—of individual and collective
* Foucault passes quickly over pages 18–20 of the manuscript:
“Obviously we would find many examples of this in the discourse of the American revolution-
aries. And maybe revolutionary thought is precisely this: to think at the same time the utility
of independence and the axiomatic of rights (American revolution).
[p. 18a] Contemporaries were perfectly aware of this heterogeneity. Bentham, Dumont, the
Rights of Man. And it remained perceptible for two centuries, since it has proved impossible to
find a genuine coherence and equilibrium between these procedures. Overwhelmingly, and not
without some reversals, regulation of the public authorities in terms of utility prevails over the
axiomatic of sovereignty in terms of original rights. Collective utility (rather than collective
will) as general axis of the art of government.
[p. 19] General tendency, but which does not cancel the other. Especially since they produce
similar, although undoubtedly not superimposable, effects. For the axiomatic of sovereignty is
led to mark imprescriptible rights so strongly that it cannot in fact find any place for an art of
government and the exercise of power by a public authority, unless the juridical constitution of
the sovereign as the collective will is so strong that the exercise of basic rights are reduced to
pure ideality. Totalitarian orientation. But the radicalism of utility, on the basis of the distinc-
tion individual utility/collective utility, will also be led to emphasize general utility over
individual utility and infinitely reduce the independence of the governed as a consequence.
[p. 20] Orientation of indefinitely extended governmentality.”
† Foucault adds: you will see it function very well in the two [inaudible word] and in a way
[inaudible word]44
t h e b i rt h o f b i o p o l i t i c s
utility, the utility of each and all, the utility of individuals and the gen-
eral utility—will be the major criteria for working out the limits of the
powers of public authorities and the formation of a form of public law
and administrative law. Since the beginning of the nineteenth century
we have been living in an age in which the problem of utility increas-
ingly encompasses all the traditional problems of law.
So, on the basis of this I would like to make a remark. With regard to
the market, we found that one of the points of anchorage of the new gov-
ernmental reason was an understanding of the market as a mechanism of
exchange and a site of veridiction regarding the relationship between value
and price. Now we find a second point of anchorage of the new govern-
mental reason. This is the elaboration of the powers of public authorities
and the measure of their interventions by reference to the principle of
utility. So, we have exchange on the side of the market, and utility on the
side of the public authorities. Exchange value and spontaneous veridiction
of economic processes, measures of utility and internal jurisdiction of acts
of the public authorities. Exchange for wealth and utility for the public
authorities: this is how governmental reason articulates the fundamental
principle of its self-limitation. Exchange on one side and utility on the
other: obviously, the general category covering both or for thinking both—
that is, exchange which must be respected in the market since the market
is veridiction, and utility to limit the power of the public authorities since
it must only be exercised where it is positively and exactly useful—is, of
course, interest, since interest is the principle of exchange and interest is
the criterion of utility. Governmental reason in its modern form, in the
form established at the beginning of the eighteenth century with the fun-
damental characteristic of a search for the principle of its self-limitation,
is a reason that functions in terms of interest. But this is no longer the
interest of an entirely self-referring state which only seeks its own growth,
wealth, population, and power, as was the state of raison d’État. In the
principle to which governmental reason must conform, interest is now
interests, a complex interplay between individual and collective interests,
between social utility and economic profit, between the equilibrium of the
market and the regime of public authorities, between basic rights and the
independence of the governed. Government, at any rate, government in
this new governmental reason, is something that works with interests.17 January 1979
45
More precisely, we can say that it is through interests that govern-
ment can get a hold on everything that exists for it in the form of indi-
viduals, actions, words, wealth, resources, property, rights, and so forth.
We can put this more clearly, if you like, with a very simple question: On
what did the sovereign, the monarch, the state have a hold in the previ-
ous system, and on what was its right to exercise this hold based, legit-
imized, and founded? It was things, lands. The king was often, not
always, considered to be the owner of the realm, and it was as such that
he could intervene. Or at any rate he owned an estate. He could exercise
a hold over the subjects since, as subjects, they had a personal relation to
the sovereign that meant that whatever the rights of the subjects them-
selves he could exercise a hold over everything. In other words, there
was a direct hold of power in the form of the sovereign, in the form of his
ministers, a direct hold of government over things and people.
On the basis of the new governmental reason—and this is the point of
separation between the old and the new, between raison d’État and reason
of the least state—government must no longer intervene, and it no longer
has a direct hold on things and people; it can only exert a hold, it is only
legitimate, founded in law and reason, to intervene, insofar as interest, or
interests, the interplay of interests, make a particular individual, thing,
good, wealth, or process of interest for individuals, or for the set of indi-
viduals, or for the interest of a given individual faced with the interest of
all, etcetera. Government is only interested in interests. The new govern-
ment, the new governmental reason, does not deal with what I would call
the things in themselves of governmentality, such as individuals, things,
wealth, and land. It no longer deals with these things in themselves. It
deals with the phenomena of politics, that is to say, interests, which pre-
cisely constitute politics and its stakes; it deals with interests, or that
respect in which a given individual, thing, wealth, and so on interests
other individuals or the collective body of individuals.
I think we have a striking example of this in the penal system. I have
tried to show how in the penal system of the seventeenth century, and
still at the start of the eighteenth century, basically when the sovereign
punished he intervened himself, and this was the true reason for the tor-
ture and execution (la supplice); he intervened individually so to speak,
or anyway as the sovereign, but physically on the individual’s body, and46
t h e b i rt h o f b i o p o l i t i c s
this gave him the right of public torture and execution: it was the mani-
festation of the sovereign himself over someone who had committed a
crime and who, by committing a crime, had of course wronged some
people, but above all had struck the sovereign in the very body of his
power. 16 This was the site of the formation, justification, and even foun-
dation of public torture and execution.
From the eighteenth century the well-known principle of mildness
of punishment appears (you can see it very clearly in Beccaria 17 )
which, once again, was not the expression of something like a change
in people’s sensibility. If you wanted to analyze it better than I have
done, on what was this moderation of punishments based? Something
is interposed between the crime, on the one hand, and the sovereign
authority with the right to punish, possibly with death, on the other.
This is the thin phenomenal theme of interests, which henceforth is
the only thing on which governmental reason can have a hold. As a
result, punishment appeared as having to be calculated in terms of the
injured party’s interests, in terms of redress for damages, etcetera.
Punishment will be rooted only in the play of the interests of others,
of the family circle, of society, and so on. Is it worthwhile punishing?
What interest is there in punishing? What form must punishment
take for it to be in society’s interests to punish? Is there an interest in
torturing, or is it more worthwhile to re-educate, and if so, how and
up to what point? How much will it cost? The insertion of this thin
phenomenal film of interest as the only sphere, or rather, as the only
possible surface of government intervention, is what explains these
changes, all of which must be referred back to this reorganization of
governmental reason.
In its new regime, government is basically no longer to be exercised
over subjects and other things subjected through these subjects.
Government is now to be exercised over what we could call the phe-
nomenal republic of interests. The fundamental question of liberalism is:
What is the utility value of government and all actions of government in
a society where exchange determines the true value of things?* I think
* Foucault adds: Utility value of government faced with a system in which exchange determines
the true value of things. How is this possible?17 January 1979
47
this question encapsulates the fundamental questions raised by liberal-
ism. With this question liberalism posed the fundamental question of
government, which is whether all the political, economic, and other
forms which have been contrasted with liberalism can really avoid this
question and avoid formulating this question of the utility of a
government in a regime where exchange determines the value of things.48
t h e b i rt h o f b i o p o l i t i c s
1. In the “Course summary” Foucault refers to Benjamin Franklin (see below, p. 322). See,
for example, the letter from Franklin to Charles de Weissenstein of 1 July 1778 in A.H.
Smyth, ed., The Writings of Benjamin Franklin (New York: Macmillan, 1905–1907) vol. VII,
p. 168, quoted in D.R. McCoy, “Benjamin Franklin’s vision of a republican political econ-
omy for America,” The William and Mary Quarterly, 3rd series, vol. 35 (4), October 1978,
p. 617: “A virtuous and laborious people could always be ‘cheaply governed’ in a repub-
lican system.”
2. The just price (justum pretium) was fixed as the ideal model of transactions by medieval
scholasticism on the basis of the Aristotelian doctrine of commutative justice
(Nicomachean Ethics, Book V). See S.L. Kaplan, Bread, Politics and Political Economy in the
Reign of Louis XV (The Hague: Martinus Nijhoff, 1976), Volume One, pp. 58–59:
“Lieutenants general of police, commissaires, inspectors, grain measurers and local officials
repeatedly invoked the ‘just price’ which they construed as their obligation to
assure ... The just price was a price which would neither ‘disgust’ merchants nor ‘wound’
consumers. It was predicated upon an ideal of moderation which tended to vary with the
circumstances. A price was thought just when merchants settled for a moderate profit and
the bulk of the people, who lived in a state of chronic misery, did not suffer immoderately,
that is to say, more than they did usually. In untroubled moments the just price was sim-
ply the current price (as the theologians had recommended), fixed by common estimation
rather than imposed by merchant maneuvers or governmental fiat.” See J.W. Baldwin, The
Medieval Theories of the Just Price: Romanists, canonists and theologians in the twelfth and
thirteenth centuries (Philadelphia: American Philosophical Society, 1959); Joseph
A. Schumpeter, History of Economic Analysis, edited from a manuscript by E. Boody
Schumpeter (London and Boston: Allen & Unwin, 1982) pp. 60–61, and pp. 88–89. See
the complementary bibliography given in S.L. Kaplan, Bread, Politics and Political Economy,
p. 59, note 14. On the question of price, see Les Mots et les Choses (Paris: Gallimard, 1966)
ch. 6, section 4; English translation by A. Sheridan, The Order of Things. An Archeology of
the Human Sciences (London: Tavistock and New York: Pantheon, 1970) ch. 6, section 4:
“The pledge and the price” (where the question of price is essentially treated in relation
to the function of money).
3. Pierre Le Pesant, seigneur de Boisguilbert (1646–1714), the author notably of Détail de la
France (1695) and the Traité de la nature, culture, commerce et intérêt des grains (1707). He is
seen as being the precursor of the physiocrats. See Joseph A. Schumpeter, History of
Economic Analysis, p. 215 note 1, and especially A. Sauvy, Pierre de Boisguilbert, ou la Naissance
de l’économie politique (Paris: INED, 1966) 2 volumes. However, it seems that Boisguilbert
does not use the concept of “natural price.” He sometimes speaks of “price of proportion”
(or “proportional” price) without a precise analytical content (buyers and sellers draw the
same advantage) and “price de rigueur,” with reference to (minimum acceptable) cost of
production.
4. See, E. Depitre, introduction to Dupont de Nemours, De l’exportation et de l’importation des
grains (1764), (Paris: P. Geuthner, 1911) pp. xxiii–xxiv: “In the physiocratic system noth-
ing is easier to determine than the good price: it is the common and hardly varying price of the
general market, the one established by competition between freely trading nations.” See also, Sécurité,
Territoire, Population, lecture of 5 April 1978, note 25; Security, Territory, Population, p. 361.
5. See A. Marshall, Principles of Economics (London: Macmillan and Co., 1890), and Joseph A.
Schumpeter, History of Economic Analysis, p. 189 and p. 220.
6. On this new definition of the market as site of veridiction or of the truth of prices, see, for
example, E. [Bonnot de] Condillac, Le Commerce et le Gouvernement considérés relativement l’un
à l’autre (Amsterdam-Paris: Jombert & Cellot, 1776) Part 1, ch. 4: “Des marchés ou des
lieux où se rendent ceux qui ont besoin de faire des échanges.” See especially p. 23 of the
1795 edition (reprinted, Paris-Geneva: Slatkine, 1980): “[ ... ] prices can only be regulated
in markets, because it is only there that the gathered citizens, by comparing their interests
in exchanging, can judge the value of things relative to their needs. They can only do that
there because it is only in markets that everything is put on view: it is only in markets that17 January 1979
7.
8.
9.
10.
11.
12.
49
one can judge the relationship of abundance and scarcity between things that determines
their respective prices.”
See Sécurité, Territoire, Population, lecture of 18 January 1978, p. 33 sq; Security, Territory,
Population, p. 30 sq.
This expression had already been employed by Foucault in the lecture delivered in
May 1978 at the Société française de philosophie, “Qu’est-ce que la critique?” Bulletin de la
Société française de philosophie, 84th year, no. 2, April-June 1990, p. 51, with regard to the
difference between genealogy and the procedures of explanatory history: “Let’s say roughly
that, in contrast with a genesis orientated towards the unity of an originating cause preg-
nant with a multiple descent, it would be a matter of a genealogy, that is to say something
which tries to reconstruct the conditions of appearance of a singularity on the basis of mul-
tiple determining elements, from which it arises not as the product, but as the effect.
Establishing intelligibility (mise en intelligibilité), therefore, but in which we should see that
it does not function according to a principle of closure.” Foucault had already dwelt on this
problem of intelligibility in history in Sécurité, Territoire, Population, lecture 8 March 1978,
p. 244; Security, Territory, Population, pp. 238–239. On the distinction between genesis and
genealogy, see ibid., lecture of 8 February 1978, p. 121; pp. 116–117.
On Foucault’s relationship with the Frankfurt School, see: “Qu’est-ce que la critique?”
pp. 42–43; “‘Omnes et singulatim’: Toward a Critique of Political Reason” in Essential Works of
Foucault, 1954–1984, Vol. 3: Power, ed. James D. Faubion (New York: The New Press,
2000) p. 299; French translation by P.E. Dauzat, “‘Omnes et singulatim’: vers une cri-
tique de la raison politique” in Dits et Écrits, 4, p. 135; “Space, Knowledge, and Power,”
Essential Works, 3, pp. 357–358; French translation by F. Durand-Bogaert, “Espace, savoir et
pouvoir,” Dits et Écrits, 4, p. 279; “Structuralisme et post-structuralisme,” interview with
G. Raulet, Dits et Écrits, 4, pp. 438–441; English translation by Jeremy Harding, amended,
“Structuralism and Post-structuralism,” Essential Works of Foucault, 1954–1984, Vol 2:
Aesthetics, Method, and Epistemology, ed. James D. Faubion (New York: The New Press,
1998) pp. 440–443.
Author of the famous treatise Dei delitti e delle pene (An Essay on Crimes and Punishments)
which was published in Livorno in 1764, Cesare Bonesana, marquis de Beccaria
(1738–1794) in 1769 obtained the chair of cameral and economic sciences established
shortly before at Milan (he renamed it the chair of political economy), which he left after
two years for employment in the Milan administration. His lecture notes were published
for the first time in 1804 by P. Custodi, with the title Elementi di economia pubblica (Scrittori
italiani di economia politica: Parte Moderna, vol. XI and XII) (Milan: G.G. Destefanis, 1804).
See also the Discours de M. le Marqui Cesare Beccaria Bonesana. ... professeur royal de la chaire
nouvellement établie par ordre de S.M. impériale pour le commerce et l’administration publique,
prononcé à son installation dans les écoles Palatines, trans. J.A. Comparet (Lausanne:
F. Grasset, 1769) [translated from the original Italian edition, Prolusione letta dal regio pro-
fessore Marchese Cesare Beccaria Bonesana nell’apertura della nuova cattedra di scienze camerali
ultimamente comendata da S.M.I.R.A. (Florence: G. Allegrini e comp., 1769)] and, Principes
d’économie politique appliqués à l’agriculture par l’auteur du “Traité des délits et des peines” (Paris:
V ve Bouchard-Huzard, 1852). “The bulk of his economic writings consisted of those gov-
ernment reports” (Joseph A. Schumpeter, History of Economic Analysis, p. 179); Schumpeter
describes Beccaria as the “Italian A. Smith,” ibid. See, Atti di governo by Beccaria, being
published in the projected seventeen volumes of the Edizione nazionale (five volumes so far
published: vol. VI–X, 1987–2000). These writings address very diverse questions: money,
mines, weights and measures, manufacture and commerce, fairs and markets, etcetera. I owe
these clarifications to the recent thesis of Ph. Audegean, “Philosophie réformatrice, Cesare
Beccaria et la critique des savoirs de son temps: droit, rhétorique, économie” (University of
Paris 1-Sorbonne, 2003).
Adam Smith (1723–1790), An Inquiry into the Nature and Causes of the Wealth of Nations
(London: W. Straham & T. Cadell, 1776), and more recently, (Oxford: Oxford University
Press, 1976) in two volumes.
See, Jeremy Bentham’s Economic Writings (see above, lecture of 10 January 1979, note 9), and
T.W. Hutchison, “Bentham as an economist,” Economic Journal, LXVI, 1956, pp. 288–306.50
t h e b i rt h o f b i o p o l i t i c s
13. Foucault comes back to these points in the lecture of 21 February 1979 (see below,
p. 167 sq).
14. See, “Il faut défendre la société,” lecture of 4 February 1976, p. 84 sq; “Society Must be
Defended,” pp. 98 sq. The word “radicalism” is not employed by Foucault here. See the
works of Christopher Hill, with which Foucault was very familiar (see A. Fontana and
M. Bertani, “Situation du cours”; “Course context,” ibid. p. 262; ibid. p. 290).
15. See below, lecture of 28 March 1979, p. 273 sq.
16. See Surveiller et Punir. Naisssance de la prison (Paris: Gallimard, 1975) pp. 51–58; English
translation by Alan Sheridan, Discipline and Punish. The Birth of the Prison (London: Allen
Lane, and New York: Pantheon, 1977) pp. 48–57. See also the 1972–1973 course, “La Société
punitive,” course summary in Dits et Écrits, 2, pp. 456–470; English translation by Robert
Hurley, “The Punitive Society” in The Essential Works of Michel Foucault 1954–1984, Vol. 1,
Ethics: Subjectivity and Truth, ed. Paul Rabinow (New York: The New Press, 1997) pp. 23–37.
17. French translation by M. Chevallier, Des délits et des peines (Geneva: Droz, 1965) § XII,
p. 24: “But des châtiments”; English translation, An Essay on Crimes and Punishments
(Edinburgh: Bell and Bradfute, 1807), ch. XII, “Of the Intent of Punishments,” pp. 41–42.
See, Surveiller et Punir, pp. 106–134, “La douceur des peines”; Discipline and Punish, “The
gentle way in punishment” pp. 104–131.three
24 January 1979
[
]
Specific features of the liberal art of government (II): (3) The
problem of European balance and international relations. ⵑ
Economic and political calculation in mercantilism. The principle of
the freedom of the market according to the physiocrats and Adam
Smith: birth of a new European model. ⵑ Appearance of a
governmental rationality extended to a world scale. Examples: the
question of maritime law; the projects of perpetual peace in the
eighteenth century. ⵑ Principles of the new liberal art of
government: a “governmental naturalism”; the production of
freedom. ⵑ The problem of liberal arbitration. Its instruments:
(1) the management of dangers and the implementation of
mechanisms of security; (2) disciplinary controls (Bentham’s
panopticism); (3) interventionist policies. ⵑ The management of
liberty and its crises.
LAST WEEK I TRIED to clarify what seem to me to be some of the
basic characteristics of the liberal art of government. First of all I spoke
about the problem of economic truth and of the truth of the market, and
then of the problem of the limitation of governmentality by the calculus
of utility. I would now like to deal with a third aspect which I think is
also fundamental, that of international equilibriums, or Europe and the
international space in liberalism.
You remember that when last year we talked about raison d’État, 1 I
tried to show you that there was a kind of equilibrium, a system of52
t h e b i rt h o f b i o p o l i t i c s
counterweights between what could be called unlimited objectives
within the state, on the one hand, and limited external objectives, on the
other. The unlimited objectives within the state were pursued through
the mechanism of the police state, that is to say, an always more emphatic,
accentuated, fine, and subtle governmentality of regimentation with no
predetermined limits. So, internally there were unlimited objectives, and
then limited objectives externally inasmuch as at the same time as the
formation of raison d’État and the organization of the police state was tak-
ing place there was also the pursuit and real organization of what is called
European balance, the principle of which is the following: to see to it that
no state prevails over the others so as to reconstitute imperial unity in
Europe; to see to it, consequently, that no state dominates all the others,
or prevails over its neighbors to such an extent that it can dominate
them, etcetera. It is quite easy to see and understand the connection
between these two mechanisms of unlimited objectives with the police
state, and limited objectives with European balance, inasmuch as if the
raison d’être, purpose, and objective of the police state, or of the internal
mechanisms which endlessly organize and develop the police state, is the
strengthening of the state itself, then the target of each state is to
strengthen itself endlessly, that is to say its aim is an unlimited increase
of its power in relation to the others. In clear terms, competition to be the
best in this competitive game will introduce into Europe a number of
inequalities, which will increase, which will be sanctioned by an imbal-
ance in the population, and consequently in military strength, and you
will end up with the well-known imperial situation from which
European balance, since the Treaty of Westphalia, wished to free Europe.
The balance was established to avoid this situation.
More precisely, in mercantilist calculation and in the way in which
mercantilism organizes the economic-political calculation of forces, it is
clear that a European equilibrium is actually unavoidable if you want to
prevent the realization of a new imperial configuration. For mercantil-
ism, competition between states assumes that everything by which one
state is enriched can, and in truth must, be deducted from the wealth of
other states. What one state acquires must be taken from the other; one
can only enrich itself at the cost of the others. In other words, what I
think is important is that for the mercantilists the economic game is a24 January 1979
53
zero sum game. It is a zero sum game quite simply because of the
monetarist conception and practice of mercantilism. There is a certain
amount of gold in the world. Since gold defines, measures, and consti-
tutes the wealth of each state, it is understood that whenever one state
gets richer it will take from the common stock of gold and consequently
impoverish the others. The monetarist character of mercantilist policy
and calculation consequently entails that competition can only be con-
ceived in the form of a zero sum game and so of the enrichment of some
at the expense of others. 2 To avoid the phenomenon of having one and
only one winner in this zero sum game, to avoid this political conse-
quence of competition thus defined, strict economic logic requires the
establishment of something like an equilibrium which will allow the
game to be interrupted, as it were, at a given moment. That is to say,
the game will be halted when there is a danger of the difference between
the players becoming too great, and it is precisely in this that European
equilibrium consists. This is exactly—well, up to a point—Pascal’s
problem: 3 in a zero sum game, what happens when you interrupt the
game and divide out the winnings between the players? Interrupting
the game of competition with the diplomacy of European equilibrium is
necessarily entailed by the monetarist conception and practice of the
mercantilists. This is the starting point.
Now, what happens in the middle of the eighteenth century, in that
period I have talked about and tried to locate the formation of a new
governmental reason? Things will, of course, be completely different in
this new raison d’État, or in this new reason of the least state which finds
the core of its veridiction in the market and its de facto jurisdiction in
utility. In fact, for the physiocrats, but also for Adam Smith, the freedom
of the market can and must function in such a way that what they call the
natural price or the good price will be established through and thanks to
this freedom. Anyway, this natural price or good price is such that it must
always be profitable to whom? It will be profitable to the seller, but also
to the buyer; to both buyer and seller. That is to say, the beneficial effects
of competition will not be divided unequally between them and neces-
sarily to the advantage of one at the expense of the other. The legitimate
game of natural competition, that is to say, competition under conditions
of freedom, can only lead to a dual profit. The fluctuation of the price54
t h e b i rt h o f b i o p o l i t i c s
around the value, which last week I showed that according to the phys-
iocrats and Adam Smith was assured by the freedom of the market,
brings into play a mechanism of mutual enrichment: maximum profit
for the seller, minimum expense for the buyers. So we find this idea,
which will be at the center of the economic game as defined by the lib-
erals, that actually the enrichment of one country, like the enrichment
of one individual, can only really be established and maintained in the
long term by a mutual enrichment. My neighbor’s wealth is important
for my own enrichment, and not in the sense that the mercantilists said
my neighbor must possess gold in order to buy my products, which will
enable me to impoverish him by enriching myself. My neighbor must be
rich, and he will be rich to the same extent as I enrich myself through
my commerce and our mutual commerce. Consequently there is a correl-
ative enrichment, an enrichment en bloc, a regional enrichment: either
the whole of Europe will be rich, or the whole of Europe will be poor.
There is no longer any cake to be divided up. We enter an age of an
economic historicity governed by, if not unlimited enrichment, then at
least reciprocal enrichment through the game of competition.
I think something very important begins to take shape here, the con-
sequences of which are, as you know, far from being exhausted. What is
taking shape is a new idea of Europe that is not at all the imperial and
Carolingian Europe more or less inherited from the Roman Empire and
referring to quite specific political structures. Nor is it any longer the
classical Europe of balance, of an equilibrium between forces established
in such a way that the force of one never prevails too decisively over the
other. It is a Europe of collective enrichment; Europe as a collective sub-
ject that, whatever the competition between states, or rather through
the competition between states, has to advance in the form of unlimited
economic progress.
This idea of progress, of a European progress, is a fundamental theme
in liberalism and completely overturns the themes of European equilib-
rium, even though these themes do not disappear completely. With this
conception of the physiocrats and Adam Smith we leave behind a con-
ception of the economic game as a zero sum game. But if it is no longer
to be a zero sum game, then permanent and continuous inputs are still
necessary. In other words, if freedom of the market must ensure the24 January 1979
55
reciprocal, correlative, and more or less simultaneous enrichment of all
the countries of Europe, for this to function, and for freedom of the mar-
ket to thus unfold according to a game that is not a zero sum game, then
it is necessary to summon around Europe, and for Europe, an increas-
ingly extended market and even, if it comes to it, everything in the world
that can be put on the market. In other words, we are invited to a glob-
alization of the market when it is laid down as a principle, and an objec-
tive, that the enrichment of Europe must be brought about as a
collective and unlimited enrichment, and not through the enrichment of
some and the impoverishment of others. The unlimited character of the
economic development of Europe, and the consequent existence of a
non-zero sum game, entails, of course, that the whole world is sum-
moned around Europe to exchange its own and Europe’s products in
the European market.
Of course, I do not mean that this is the first time that Europe thinks
about the world, or thinks the world. I mean simply that this may be
the first time that Europe appears as an economic unit, as an economic
subject in the world, or considers the world as able to be and having to
be its economic domain. It seems to me that it is the first time that
Europe appears in its own eyes as having to have the world for its
unlimited market. Europe is no longer merely covetous of all the world’s
riches that sparkle in its dreams or perceptions. Europe is now in a state
of permanent and collective enrichment through its own competition,
on condition that the entire world becomes its market. In short, in the
time of mercantilism, raison d’État, and the police state, etcetera, the cal-
culation of a European balance enabled one to block the consequences of
an economic game conceived as being over.* Now, the opening up of a
world market allows one to continue the economic game and conse-
quently to avoid the conflicts which derive from a finite market. But this
opening of the economic game onto the world clearly implies a differ-
ence of both kind and status between Europe and the rest of the world.
That is to say, there will be Europe on one side, with Europeans as the
* The manuscript adds, p. 5: “by halting the game when the losses and gains of the different
players diverge too much from the situation at the start of the game (Pascal’s problem of the
interruption of the game).”56
t h e b i rt h o f b i o p o l i t i c s
players, and then the world on the other, which will be the stake. The
game is in Europe, but the stake is the world.
It seems to me that we have in this one of the fundamental features of
this new art of government that is indexed to the problem of the market
and market veridiction. Obviously, this organization, or at any rate this
reflection on the reciprocal positions of Europe and the world, is not the
start of colonization. Colonization had long been underway. Nor do I
think this is the start of imperialism in the modern or contemporary
sense of the term, for we probably see the formation of this new imperi-
alism later in the nineteenth century. But let’s say that we have the start
of a new type of global calculation in European governmental practice. I
think there are many signs of this appearance of a new form of global
rationality, of a new calculation on the scale of the world. I will refer to
just some of these.
Take, for example, the history of maritime law in the eighteenth
century, and the way in which, in terms of international law, there was
an attempt to think of the world, or at least the sea, as a space of free
competition, of free maritime circulation, and consequently as one of the
necessary conditions for the organization of a world market. The history
of piracy—the way in which it was at once used, encouraged, combated,
and suppressed, etcetera—could also figure as one of the aspects of this
elaboration of a worldwide space in terms of a number of legal princi-
ples. We can say that there was a juridification of the world which
should be thought of in terms of the organization of a market.
Yet another example of this appearance of a governmental rationality
that has the entire planet for its horizon is the eighteenth century projects
for peace and international organization. If you consider those that existed
in the seventeenth century, you will see that these projects for peace were
essentially based on European equilibrium, that is to say, on the exact
balance of reciprocal forces between different states; between the different
powerful states, or between different coalitions of states, or between the
powerful states and a coalition of the smaller states, and so on. From the
eighteenth century, the idea of perpetual peace and the idea of interna-
tional organization are, I think, articulated completely differently. It is no
longer so much the limitation of internal forces that is called upon to guar-
antee and found a perpetual peace, but rather the unlimited nature of the24 January 1979
57
external market. The larger the external market, the fewer its borders and
limits, the more you will have a guarantee of perpetual peace.
If you take Kant’s text on the project of perpetual peace, for exam-
ple, which dates from 1795, 4 right at the end of the eighteenth century,
there is a chapter entitled “On the Guarantee of a Perpetual Peace.” 5
How does Kant conceive of this perpetual peace? He says: What funda-
mentally is it in history that guarantees this perpetual peace and
promises us that one day it really will take shape and form in history?
Is it men’s will and their mutual understanding, the political and diplo-
matic devices that they will have been able to construct, or the organi-
zation of rights that they will have been able to install between them?
Not at all. It is nature, 6 just as in the physiocrats it was nature that
guaranteed the good regulation of the market. And how does nature
guarantee perpetual peace? It is very simple, Kant says. Nature after all
has done some absolutely marvelous things, since it has managed, for
example, to get not only animals, but even peoples to live in lands com-
pletely scorched by the Sun or frozen by eternal sheets of ice. 7 There are
people who manage to live there in spite of everything, which proves
that there is nowhere in the world where human beings cannot live. 8
But for people to be able to live they must be able to feed themselves, to
produce their food, have a social organization, and exchange their prod-
ucts between themselves or with people from other regions. Nature
intended the entire world, the whole of its surface, to be given over to
the economic activity of production and exchange. And on that basis,
nature has prescribed a number of obligations that are juridical obliga-
tions for man, 9 but which nature has in a way dictated to him secretly,
which she has, as it were, marked out in the very arrangement of things,
of geography, the climate, and so on. What are these arrangements?
First, that men can have relations of exchange with each other indi-
vidually, supported by property, etcetera, and this prescription or pre-
cept of nature will be taken up in legal obligations and become civil law. 10
Second, nature determined that men be distributed across the world
in distinct regions and that within each of these regions they have privil-
eged relationships with each other that they do not have with the inhab-
itants of other regions, and men have taken up this precept in legal terms
by forming separate states which maintain certain legal relationships58
t h e b i rt h o f b i o p o l i t i c s
between them. This will become international law. 11 But in addition,
nature has wished that there are not only juridical relationships between
these states, guaranteeing their independence, but also commercial rela-
tionships that cross the borders between states and consequently make
the juridical independence of each state porous, as it were. 12 Commercial
relationships cross the world, just as nature intended and to the same
extent as nature intended the whole world to be populated, and this will
constitute cosmopolitan law or commercial law. This edifice of civil law,
international law, and cosmopolitan law is nothing other than man’s
taking up of a precept of nature as obligations. 13 So we can say that law,
inasmuch as it resumes the precept of nature, will be able to promise
what was in a way already outlined in the first action of nature when it
populated the entire world:* something like perpetual peace. Perpetual
peace is guaranteed by nature and this guarantee is manifested in the
population of the entire world and in the commercial relationships
stretching across the whole world. The guarantee of perpetual peace is
therefore actually commercial globalization.
A number of things should no doubt be added to this, but in any case
I should answer an objection straightaway. When I say that a new form of
political calculation on an international scale emerges in the thought of
the physiocrats, Adam Smith, of Kant too, and of eighteenth century
jurists, I do not in any way mean that every other form of reflection,
calculation, and analysis, that every other governmental practice disap-
pears. For, if it is true that something like a worldwide, global market is
discovered in this period, if at this moment the privileged position of
Europe in relation to the world is asserted, and if it is also asserted at this
time that competition between European states is a factor in their com-
mon enrichment, this does not mean of course—as all history proves—
that we enter into a period of European peace and the peaceful
globalization of politics. In fact, with the nineteenth century we enter
the worst period of customs barriers, forms of economic protectionism,
of national economies and political nationalism, and the biggest wars the
world has ever known. What I wanted to show you was simply that a
* Foucault adds: it promises already24 January 1979
59
particular form of reflection, analysis, and calculation appeared at this
time which is integrated as it were into political practices that may per-
fectly well conform to a different type of calculation, a different system of
thought, and a different practice of power. We would only have to look at
what happened at the Congress of Vienna, for example. 14 It could be said
that this is the most striking manifestation of what was sought after in
the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries, namely a European balance.
What were its concerns in fact? Its task was to put an end to what
appeared to be the resurrection of the imperial idea with Napoleon.
Because the historical paradox of Napoleon is that if, at the level of inter-
nal policy, he was manifestly hostile to the idea of a police state, and his
problem was really how to limit governmental practice internally 15 —and
this is clear from his interventions in the Council of State and the way in
which he reflected on his own governmental practice 16 —on the other
hand, we can say that Napoleon was completely archaic in his external
policy, inasmuch as he wanted to reconstitute something like the imper-
ial configuration against which the whole of Europe had been ranked
since the seventeenth century. In truth, Napoleon’s imperial idea, so far
as it can be reconstructed, in spite of the astounding silence of historians
on this theme, seems to have corresponded to three objectives.
First (and I think I talked about this last year), 17 if we go by what the
historians and jurists of the eighteenth century said about the
Carolingian Empire, 18 in terms of internal policy, the Empire guaranteed
freedoms. In its opposition to the monarchy, the Empire did not repre-
sent more power but rather less power and less governmentality. On the
other hand—and probably on the basis of the limitlessness of the revo-
lutionary objectives, that is to say, to revolutionize the whole world—
the Empire was a way of taking up the revolutionary project that
irrupted in France in 1792–1793, and of taking it up in the then archaic
idea of imperial domination inherited from Carolingian forms or from
the form of the Holy Roman Empire. This mixture of the idea of an
Empire which internally guarantees freedoms, of an Empire which will
give a European form to the unlimited revolutionary project, and finally
of an Empire which will reconstitute the Carolingian, or German, or
Austrian form of Empire, made up the hotchpotch of Napoleon’s
imperial politics.60
t h e b i rt h o f b i o p o l i t i c s
The problem of the Congress of Vienna was, of course, to close off, as it
were, that imperial limitlessness. It was, of course, to re-establish the
equilibrium of Europe, but basically with two different objectives: the
Austrian objective and the English objective. The Austrian objective was
to reconstitute a European equilibrium in the old form of the seventeenth
and eighteenth centuries, ensuring that no country can prevail over the
others in Europe. Austria was absolutely tied to this kind of project inas-
much as it only had an administrative government, being made up of a
number of different states and only organizing these in the form of the old
police state. This plurality of police states at the heart of Europe meant
that Europe itself was basically modeled on this old schema of a balanced
multiplicity of police states. Europe had to be in the image of Austria
for Austria to remain as it was. To that extent, we can say that, for
Metternich, 19 the calculation of European equilibrium was still and
remained that of the eighteenth century. On the other hand, what kind of
equilibrium was sought by England* and imposed together with Austria
at the Congress of Vienna? It was a way of regionalizing Europe, of limit-
ing, of course, the power of each of the European states, but so as to allow
England a political and economic role as economic mediator between
Europe and the world market, so as to globalize the European economy
through the mediation, the relay of England’s economic power. So we have
here a completely different calculation of European equilibrium founded
on the principle of Europe as a particular economic region faced with, or
within, a world that must become its market. The calculation of European
equilibrium for [Austria] † at the Congress of Vienna is completely differ-
ent. So you can see that within a single historical reality you may very well
find two entirely different types of rationality and political calculation.
I will stop these speculations here and before moving on to the analy-
sis of present day liberalism in Germany and America, I would like to
summarize a little what I have said about these fundamental features of
liberalism, or at any rate of an art of government which emerges in the
eighteenth century.
* The manuscript clarifies, p. 10: “Castelreagh” [Henry Robert Stewart Castelreagh
(1762–1822), Tory foreign secretary from 1812 to 1822, who played an important role at Vienna
checking the ambitions of Russia and Prussia].
†
M.F.: England24 January 1979
61
So, I have tried to indicate three features: veridiction of the market,
limitation by the calculation of governmental utility, and now the
position of Europe as a region of unlimited economic development in
relation to a world market. This is what I have called liberalism.
Why speak of liberalism, and why speak of a liberal art of govern-
ment, when it is quite clear that the things I have referred to and the
features I have tried to indicate basically point to a much more general
phenomenon than the pure and simple economic doctrine, or the pure
and simple political doctrine, or the pure and simple economic-political
choice of liberalism in the strict sense? If we take things up a bit further
back, if we take them up at their origin, you can see that what charac-
terizes this new art of government I have spoken about would be much
more a naturalism than liberalism, inasmuch as the freedom that the
physiocrats and Adam Smith talk about is much more the spontaneity,
the internal and intrinsic mechanics of economic processes than a juridi-
cal freedom of the individual recognized as such. Even in Kant, who is
much more a jurist than an economist, you have seen that perpetual
peace is not guaranteed by law, but by nature. In actual fact, it is some-
thing like a governmental naturalism which emerges in the middle of the
eighteenth century. And yet I think we can speak of liberalism. I could
also tell you—but I will come back to this 20 —that this naturalism,
which I think is fundamental or at any rate original in this art of
government, appears very clearly in the physiocratic conception of
enlightened despotism. I will come back to this at greater length, but,
in a few words, what conclusions do the physiocrats draw from their
discovery of the existence of spontaneous mechanisms of the economy
which must be respected by every government if it does not want to
induce effects counter to or even the opposite of its objectives? Is it that
people must be given the freedom to act as they wish? Is it that govern-
ments must recognize the essential, basic natural rights of individuals?
Is it that government must be as little authoritarian as possible? It is
none of these things. What the physiocrats deduce from their discovery
is that the government must know these mechanisms in their innermost
and complex nature. Once it knows these mechanisms, it must, of
course, undertake to respect them. But this does not mean that it pro-
vide itself with a juridical framework respecting individual freedoms62
t h e b i rt h o f b i o p o l i t i c s
and the basic rights of individuals. It means, simply, that it arm its
politics with a precise, continuous, clear and distinct knowledge of what
is taking place in society, in the market, and in the economic circuits, so
that the limitation of its power is not given by respect for the freedom
of individuals, but simply by the evidence of economic analysis which it
knows has to be respected. 21 It is limited by evidence, not by the
freedom of individuals.
So, what we see appearing in the middle of the eighteenth century
really is a naturalism much more than a liberalism. Nevertheless, I think
we can employ the word liberalism inasmuch as freedom really is at the
heart of this practice or of the problems it confronts. Actually, I think
we should be clear that when we speak of liberalism with regard to this
new art of government, this does not mean* that we are passing from an
authoritarian government in the seventeenth century and at the start of
the eighteenth century to a government which becomes more tolerant,
more lax, and more flexible. I do not want to say that this is not the case,
but neither do I want to say that it is. It does not seem to me that a
proposition like that has much historical or political meaning. I did not
want to say that there was a quantitative increase of freedom between
the start of the eighteenth century and, let’s say, the nineteenth century.
I have not said this for two reasons. One is factual and the other is a
reason of method and principle.
The factual reason first of all. What sense is there in saying, or simply
wondering, if an administrative monarchy like that of France in the sev-
enteenth and eighteenth centuries, with all its big, heavy, unwieldy, and
inflexible machinery, with its statutory privileges which had to be rec-
ognized, with the arbitrariness of decisions left to different people, and
with all the shortcomings of its instruments, allowed more or less free-
dom than a regime which is liberal, let’s say, but which takes on the task
of continuously and effectively taking charge of individuals and their
well-being, health, and work, their way of being, behaving, and even
dying, etcetera? So, comparing the quantity of freedom between one sys-
tem and another does not in fact have much sense. And we do not see
* Foucault adds: we should not understand24 January 1979
63
what type of demonstration, what type of gauge or measure we could
apply.
This leads us to the second reason, which seems to me to be more
fundamental. This is that we should not think of freedom as a universal
which is gradually realized over time, or which undergoes quantitative
variations, greater or lesser drastic reductions, or more or less important
periods of eclipse. It is not a universal which is particularized in time
and geography. Freedom is not a white surface with more or less numer-
ous black spaces here and there and from time to time. Freedom is never
anything other—but this is already a great deal—than an actual relation
between governors and governed, a relation in which the measure of the
“too little”* existing freedom is given by the “even more” † freedom
demanded. So when I say “liberal” ‡ I am not pointing to a form of gov-
ernmentality which would leave more white spaces of freedom. I mean
something else.
If I employ the world “liberal,” it is first of all because this govern-
mental practice in the process of establishing itself is not satisfied with
respecting this or that freedom, with guaranteeing this or that freedom.
More profoundly, it is a consumer of freedom. It is a consumer of free-
dom inasmuch as it can only function insofar as a number of freedoms
actually exist: freedom of the market, freedom to buy and sell, the free
exercise of property rights, freedom of discussion, possible freedom of
expression, and so on. The new governmental reason needs freedom
therefore, the new art of government consumes freedom. It consumes
freedom, which means that it must produce it. It must produce it, it
must organize it. The new art of government therefore appears as the
management of freedom, not in the sense of the imperative: “be free,”
with the immediate contradiction that this imperative may contain. The
formula of liberalism is not “be free.” Liberalism formulates simply the
following: I am going to produce what you need to be free. I am going to
see to it that you are free to be free. And so, if this liberalism is not so
much the imperative of freedom as the management and organization of
* In inverted commas in the manuscript, p. 13.
†
In inverted commas in the manuscript, p. 13.
‡
In inverted commas in the manuscript, p. 13.64
t h e b i rt h o f b i o p o l i t i c s
the conditions in which one can be free, it is clear that at the heart of
this liberal practice is an always different and mobile problematic
relationship between the production of freedom and that which in the
production of freedom risks limiting and destroying it. Liberalism as
I understand it, the liberalism we can describe as the art of govern-
ment formed in the eighteenth century, entails at its heart a productive/
destructive relationship [with]* freedom [ ... ]. † Liberalism must pro-
duce freedom, but this very act entails the establishment of limita-
tions, controls, forms of coercion, and obligations relying on threats,
etcetera.
Clearly, we have examples of this. There must be free trade, of course,
but how can we practice free trade in fact if we do not control and limit
a number of things, and if we do not organize a series of preventive meas-
ures to avoid the effects of one country’s hegemony over others, which
would be precisely the limitation and restriction of free trade? All the
European countries and the United States encounter this paradox from
the start of the nineteenth century when, convinced by the economists
of the end of the eighteenth century, those in power who want to estab-
lish the order of commercial freedom come up against British hegemony.
American governments, for example, who used this problem of free
trade as a reason for revolt against England, established protectionist
tariffs from the start of the nineteenth century in order to save a free
trade that would be compromised by English hegemony. Similarly, there
must be freedom of the internal market, of course, but again, for there to
be a market there must be buyers as well as sellers. Consequently, if neces-
sary, the market must be supported and buyers created by mechanisms
of assistance. For freedom of the internal market to exist, the effects of
monopolies must be prevented, and so anti-monopoly legislation is
needed. There must be a free labor market, but again there must be a
large enough number of sufficiently competent, qualified, and politically
disarmed workers to prevent them exerting pressure on the labor mar-
ket. We have then the conditions for the creation for a formidable body
* Manuscript. M.F.: in relation to
†
An inaudible passage on the recording; [ ... ] a relation [ ... ] of consumption/annulment of
freedom.24 January 1979
65
of legislation and an incredible range of governmental interventions to
guarantee production of the freedom needed in order to govern.
Broadly speaking, in the liberal regime, in the liberal art of govern-
ment, freedom of behavior is entailed, called for, needed, and serves as a
regulator, but it also has to be produced and organized. So, freedom in the
regime of liberalism is not a given, it is not a ready-made region which has
to be respected, or if it is, it is so only partially, regionally, in this or that
case, etcetera. Freedom is something which is constantly produced.
Liberalism is not acceptance of freedom; it proposes to manufacture it
constantly, to arouse it and produce it, with, of course, [the system]* of
constraints and the problems of cost raised by this production.
What, then, will be the principle of calculation for this cost of
manufacturing freedom? The principle of calculation is what is called
security. That is to say, liberalism, the liberal art of government, is forced
to determine the precise extent to which and up to what point individ-
ual interest, that is to say, individual interests insofar as they are different
and possibly opposed to each other, constitute a danger for the interest of
all. The problem of security is the protection of the collective interest
against individual interests. Conversely, individual interests have to be
protected against everything that could be seen as an encroachment of
the collective interest. Again, the freedom of economic processes must not
be a danger, either for enterprises or for workers. The freedom of the
workers must not become a danger for the enterprise and production.
Individual accidents and events in an individual’s life, such as illness or
inevitable old age, must not be a danger either for individuals or for soci-
ety. In short, strategies of security, which are, in a way, both liberalism’s
other face and its very condition, must correspond to all these impera-
tives concerning the need to ensure that the mechanism of interests does
not give rise to individual or collective dangers. The game of freedom and
security is at the very heart of this new governmental reason whose gen-
eral characteristics I have tried to describe. The problems of what I shall
call the economy of power peculiar to liberalism are internally sustained,
as it were, by this interplay of freedom and security.
* Conjecture: inaudible words66
t h e b i rt h o f b i o p o l i t i c s
Broadly speaking, in the old political system of sovereignty there was
a set of legal and economic relations between the sovereign and the
subject which committed, and even obliged the sovereign to protect the
subject. But this protection was, in a way, external. The subject could
demand the protection of his sovereign against an external or internal
enemy. It is completely different in the case of liberalism. It is no longer
just that kind of external protection of the individual himself which
must be assured. Liberalism turns into a mechanism continually having
to arbitrate between the freedom and security of individuals by reference
to this notion of danger. Basically, if on one side—and this is what I said
last week—liberalism is an art of government that fundamentally deals
with interests, it cannot do this—and this is the other side of the coin—
without at the same time managing the dangers and mechanisms of
security/freedom, the interplay of security/freedom which must ensure
that individuals or the community have the least exposure to danger.
A number of consequences follow from this. First, we can say that the
motto of liberalism is: “Live dangerously.” “Live dangerously,” that is to
say, individuals are constantly exposed to danger, or rather, they are
conditioned to experience their situation, their life, their present, and
their future as containing danger. I think this kind of stimulus of danger
will be one of the major implications of liberalism. An entire education
and culture of danger appears in the nineteenth century which is very
different from those great apocalyptic threats of plague, death, and war
which fed the political and cosmological imagination of the Middle
Ages, and even of the seventeenth century. The horsemen of the
Apocalypse disappear and in their place everyday dangers appear,
emerge, and spread everywhere, perpetually being brought to life, reac-
tualized, and circulated by what could be called the political culture of
danger in the nineteenth century. This political culture of danger has a
number of aspects. For example, there is the campaign for savings banks
at the start of the nineteenth century; 22 you see the appearance of detec-
tive fiction and journalistic interest in crime around the middle of the
nineteenth century; there are the campaigns around disease and hygiene;
and then think too of what took place with regard to sexuality and the
fear of degeneration: 23 degeneration of the individual, the family, the race,
and the human species. In short, everywhere you see this stimulation of24 January 1979
67
the fear of danger which is, as it were, the condition, the internal
psychological and cultural correlative of liberalism. There is no liberal-
ism without a culture of danger.
The second consequence of this liberalism and liberal art of govern-
ment is the considerable extension of procedures of control, constraint,
and coercion which are something like the counterpart and counter-
weights of different freedoms. I have drawn attention to the fact that the
development, dramatic rise, and dissemination throughout society of
these famous disciplinary techniques for taking charge of the behavior of
individuals day by day and in its fine detail is exactly contemporaneous
with the age of freedoms. 24 Economic freedom, liberalism in the sense I
have just been talking about, and disciplinary techniques are completely
bound up with each other. At the beginning of his career, or around
1792–1795, Bentham presented the famous Panopticon as a procedure for
institutions like schools, factories, and prisons which would enable one
to supervise the conduct of individuals while increasing the profitability
and productivity of their activity. 25 At the end of his life, in his project of
the general codification of English legislation, 26 Bentham will propose
that the Panopticon should be the formula for the whole of government,
saying that the Panopticon is the very formula of liberal government. 27
What basically must a government do? It must give way to everything
due to natural mechanisms in both behavior and production. It must give
way to these mechanisms and make no other intervention, to start with
at least, than that of supervision. Government, initially limited to the
function of supervision, is only to intervene when it sees that something
is not happening according to the general mechanics of behavior,
exchange, and economic life. Panopticism is not a regional mechanics
limited to certain institutions; for Bentham, panopticism really is a gen-
eral political formula that characterizes a type of government.
The third consequence (the second being the conjunction between
the disciplines and liberalism), is the appearance in this new art of gov-
ernment of mechanisms with the function of producing, breathing life
into, and increasing freedom, of introducing additional freedom through
additional control and intervention. That is to say, control is no longer
just the necessary counterweight to freedom, as in the case of panopti-
cism: it becomes its mainspring. And here again we have examples of68
t h e b i rt h o f b i o p o l i t i c s
this, such as what took place in England and the United States in the
twentieth century, in the 1930s say, when not only the economic but
also the political consequences of the developing economic crisis were
immediately detected and seen to represent a danger to a number of
what were thought to be basic freedoms. Roosevelt’s welfare policy, for
example, starting from 1932, 28 was a way of guaranteeing and producing
more freedom in a dangerous situation of unemployment: freedom to
work, freedom of consumption, political freedom, and so on. What was
the price of this? The price was precisely a series of artificial, voluntarist
interventions, of direct economic interventions in the market repre-
sented by the basic Welfare measures, and which from 1946, and even
from the start moreover, were described as being in themselves threats of
a new despotism. In this case democratic freedoms are only guaranteed
by an economic interventionism which is denounced as a threat to free-
dom. So we arrive, if you like—and this is also an important point to
keep hold of—at the idea that in the end this liberal art of government
introduces by itself or is the victim from within [of]* what could be
called crises of governmentality. These are crises which may be due, for
example, to the increase in the economic cost of the exercise of these
freedoms. Consider, for example, how, in the texts of the [Trilateral] 29
in recent years, there has been an attempt to project the effects of
political freedom on the economic level of cost. So there is a problem, or
crisis, if you like, or a consciousness of crisis, based on the definition of
the economic cost of the exercise of freedom.
Another form of crisis would be due to the inflation of the compen-
satory mechanisms of freedom. That is to say, for the exercise of some
freedoms, like that of the freedom of the market and anti-monopoly legis-
lation, for example, you could have the formation of a legislative strait-
jacket which the market partners experience as excessive interventionism
and excessive constraint and coercion. At a much more local level, you
have everything which takes on the appearance of revolt and rejection of
the world of the disciplines. Finally, and above all, there are processes of
clogging such that the mechanisms for producing freedom, precisely
* M.F.: by24 January 1979
69
those that are called upon to manufacture this freedom, actually produce
destructive effects which prevail over the very freedom they are sup-
posed to produce. This is, if you like, the ambiguity of all the devices
which could be called “liberogenic,”* that is to say, devices intended to
produce freedom which potentially risk producing exactly the opposite.
This is precisely the present crisis of liberalism. All of those mecha-
nisms which since the years from 1925 to 1930 have tried to offer eco-
nomic and political formulae to secure states against communism,
socialism, National Socialism, and fascism, all these mechanisms and
guarantees of freedom which have been implemented in order to pro-
duce this additional freedom or, at any rate, to react to threats to this
freedom, have taken the form of economic interventions, that is to say,
shackling economic practice, or anyway, of coercive interventions in the
domain of economic practice. Whether German liberals of the Freiburg
School from 1927 to 1930, 30 or present day, so-called libertarian
American liberals, 31 in both cases the starting point of their analysis and
the cornerstone of their problem is this: mechanisms of economic inter-
vention have been deployed to avoid the reduction of freedom that
would be entailed by transition to socialism, fascism, or National
Socialism. But is it not the case that these mechanisms of economic
intervention surreptitiously introduce types of intervention and modes
of action which are as harmful to freedom as the visible and manifest
political forms one wants to avoid? In other words, Keynesian kinds of
intervention will be absolutely central to these different discussions. We
can say that around Keynes, 32 around the economic interventionist policy
perfected between 1930 and 1960, immediately before and after the war,
all these interventions have brought about what we can call a crisis of
liberalism, and this crisis manifests itself in a number of re-evaluations,
re-appraisals, and new projects in the art of government which were for-
mulated immediately before and after the war in Germany, and which
are presently being formulated in America.
To summarize, or conclude, I would like to say that if it is true that a
feature of the contemporary world, or of the modern world since the
* “libérogènes”: in inverted commas in the manuscript.70
t h e b i rt h o f b i o p o l i t i c s
eighteenth century, really has been the constant presence of phenomena
of what may be called crises of capitalism, couldn’t we also say that there
have been crises of liberalism, which are not, of course, independent of
these crises of capitalism? The problem of the thirties I have just been
referring to is indeed the proof of this. But crises of liberalism are not
just the pure and simple or direct projection of these crises of capitalism
in the political sphere. You can find crises of liberalism linked to crises
of the capitalist economy. But you can also find them with a chrono-
logical gap with regard to these crises, and in any case the way in which
these crises manifest themselves, are handled, call forth reactions, and
prompt re-organizations is not directly deducible from the crises of cap-
italism. It is the crisis of the general apparatus (dispositif ) of govern-
mentality, and it seems to me that you could study the history of these
crises of the general apparatus of governmentality which was installed in
the eighteenth century.
That is what I will try to do this year, but approaching things retro-
spectively, as it were. That is to say, I will start with the way in which
the elements of this crisis of the apparatus of governmentality have been
set out and formulated over the last thirty years, and [I will try]* to find
in the history of the nineteenth century some of the elements which
enable us to clarify the way in which the crisis of the apparatus of gov-
ernmentality is currently experienced, lived, practiced, and formulated.
* M.F.: trying24 January 1979
71
1. See Sécurité, Territoire, Population, lecture of 22 March 1978, p. 295 sq.; Security, Territory,
Population, p. 287 sq.
2. See this formula of a journalist, de Law, in the Mercure de France, April 1720, with regard to
foreign trade: “One can usually only win if the other loses,” quoted by C. Larrère,
L’Invention de l’économie au XVIII e siècle (Paris: PUF, 1992) p. 102, with regard to the mer-
cantilist conception of foreign trade.
3. Foucault is alluding to the method of rational calculation of chance set out by Pascal in 1654
and, more precisely, to the problem of the “proportion of the last or first rounds”: “In a
game of n rounds, what rule enables one to determine the fraction of the other’s money that
should be given to player A if the game is stopped just before its conclusion” or “just after the
first round won.” C. Chevalley, Pascal. Contingence et probabilités (Paris: PUF, 1995) p. 88. See
Blaise Pascal, Letters to Fermat from 29 July to 24 August 1654, in Œuvres complètes,
ed. L. Lafuma (Paris: Le Seuil, 1963) pp. 43–49.
4. I. Kant, Zum ewigen Frieden (Königsberg: Friedrich Nicolovius, 1795; Berlin: Akademie
Ausgabe, 1912) vol. VIII, pp. 341–386; French translation by J. Gibelin, Projet de paix
perpétuelle (Paris: Vrin, 1984, 5th ed.), Foucault used the first, 1948 edition of this trans-
lation; English translation by H.B. Nisbet, “Perpetual Peace: A Philosophical Sketch” in
Hans Reiss, ed., Kant’s Political Writings (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press,
1970).
5. Projet de paix perpétuelle, First supplement, “De la garantie de la paix perpétuelle,”
pp. 35–48; “Perpetual Peace: A Philosophical Sketch,” First supplement “On the
Guarantee of a Perpetual Peace,” pp. 108–114.
6. Ibid. p. 35; English, ibid. p. 108: “Perpetual peace is guaranteed by no less an authority than
the great artist [Künstlerin] Nature herself (natura daedala rerum). The mechanical process of
nature visibly exhibits the purposive plan ( ... ).”
7. Ibid. pp. 38–39; English ibid. p. 110: “It is in itself wonderful that moss can still grow in
the cold wastes around the Arctic Ocean; the reindeer can scrape it out from beneath the
snow, and can thus itself serve as nourishment or as a draft animal for the Ostiaks or
Samoyeds. Similarly the sandy salt deserts containing the camel, which seems as if it had
been created for travelling over them in order that they might not be left unutilised.”
8. Ibid. p. 38; English pp. 109–110: “Firstly, she has taken care that human beings are able to
live in all the areas where they are settled.”
9. Ibid.; English ibid. p. 110: “[The third provisional arrangement of nature is] she has
compelled them by the same means to enter into more or less legal relationships.” Foucault
does not mention the means by which, according to Kant, nature has achieved her ends of
populating inhospitable regions and establishing juridical bonds, namely: war.
10. Ibid. pp. 43–46; English ibid. pp. 112–113.
11. Ibid. pp. 46–47; English ibid. p. 113: “The idea of international right presupposes the sep-
arate existence [Absonderung] of many independent adjoining States.”
12. Ibid. pp. 47–48; English ibid. p. 114: “Thus nature wisely separates the nations, although
the will of each individual State, even basing its argument on international right, would
gladly unite them under its own sway by force or by cunning. On the other hand, nature
also unites nations which the concept of cosmopolitan right would not have protected
from violence and war, and does so by means of their mutual self-interest. For the spirit
of commerce sooner or later takes hold of every people, and it cannot exist side by side
with war.”
13. Ibid. p. 43; English ibid. p. 112: “And how does nature guarantee that what man ought to do
by the laws of his freedom (but does not do) will in fact be done through nature’s com-
pulsion, without prejudice to the free agency of man? This question arises, moreover, in all
three areas of public right—in political, international and cosmopolitan right.”
14. The conference in Vienna from September 1814 to June 1815 which brought together the
major powers allied against France (Russia, Great Britain, Austria, and Prussia). Its aim
was to establish a lasting peace after the Napoleonic wars and to redraw the political map
of Europe. See, C.K. Weber, The Congress of Vienna: 1814–1815 (London and New York:
H. Milford, Oxford University Press, 1919; reprinted, London: Thames and Hudson,
1963).72
t h e b i rt h o f b i o p o l i t i c s
15. See the interview of 1982, “Space, Knowledge, and Power,” Essential Works of Foucault, 3,
p. 351, in which Foucault claims that Napoleon can be placed “almost exactly at the break
between the old organization of the eighteenth-century police state ( ... ) and the forms of
the modern state, which he invented.” In Surveiller et Punir, p. 219; Discipline and Punish,
p. 217, however, Foucault places the Napoleonic figure “at the point of junction of the
monarchical, ritual exercise of sovereignty and the hierarchical, permanent exercise of
indefinite discipline.” See the quotation, on the same page, taken from J.B. Treilhard,
Exposé des motifs des lois composant le code de procédure criminelle (Paris: 1808) p. 14.
16. See A. Marquiset, Napoléon sténographié au Conseil d’État (Paris: H. Champion, 1913);
J. Bourdon, Napoléon au Conseil d’État, unpublished notes and verbal proceedings of
J.-G. Locré, secretary general of the Council of State (Paris: Berger-Levrault, 1963);
C. Durand, Études sur le Conseil d’État napoléonien (Paris: PUF, 1947); C. Durand, “Le fonc-
tionnement du Conseil d’État napoléonien,” Bibliothèque de l’université d’Aix-Marseille,
series I, Cap, Impr. Louis Jean, 1954; C. Durand, “Napoléon et le Conseil d’État pendant
la seconde moitié de l’Empire,” Études et Documents du Conseil d’État, no. XXII, 1969,
pp. 269–285.
17. Foucault did not deal with this point in the 1978 lectures, but in those of 1976, “Il faut
défendre la société,” lecture of 3 March 1976, pp. 179–181; “Society Must Be Defended,”
pp. 199–202, on the basis of J.-B. Dubos, Histoire critique de l’établissement de la monarchie
française dans les Gaules (Paris, 1734).
18. See, for example, Mably, Observations sur l’histoire de France (Geneva: 1765) Book VIII,
ch. 7: “( ... ) will a new Charlemagne come among us? We must wish for it, but we can-
not hope so,” in Mably, Sur la théorie du pouvoir politique, selected texts (Paris: Éditions
sociales, 1975) p. 194.
19. Klemenz Wenzel Nepomuk Lotar, prince de Metternich-Winneburg, called Metternich
(1773–1859), Austrian foreign minister from the Congress of Vienna.
20. Foucault does not return to this subject in these lectures.
21. On evidence (évidence) as the principle of governmental self-limitation, see Sécurité,
Territoire, Population, lecture of 5 April 1978, p. 361; Security, Territory, Population, p. 350.
22. The first savings bank, conceived as a preventive remedy for the improvidence of the lower
classes, was founded in Paris in 1818. See R. Castel, Le Métamorphoses de la question sociale
(Paris: Fayard, 1995; re-published Gallimard, 1999) pp. 402–403.
23. See, Les Anormaux. Cours au Collège de France, 1974–1975, eds. V. Marchetti and A. Salomoni
(Paris: Gallimard-Le Seuil, 1999) Lecture of 19 March 1975, pp. 297–300; English trans-
lation by Graham Burchell, Abnormal. Lectures at the Collège de France, 1974–1975, English
series editor, Arnold I. Davidson (New York: Picador, 2003) pp. 315–318.
24. We recall the way in which, the previous year, Foucault corrected his previous analysis of
the relations between disciplinary techniques and individual freedoms (see Sécurité,
Territoire, Population, lecture of 18 January 1978, pp. 49–50; Security, Territory, Population,
pp. 48–49). The present argument extends this clarification, making freedom “the correl-
ative ( ... ) of apparatuses of security.”
25. It is worth recalling that the Panopticon, or Inspection-House, was not just a model of
prison organization, but the idea of a new principle of construction which can be applied
to all sorts of establishments. See the complete title of the first edition: “Panopticon”: or, the
Inspection-House; containing the idea of a new principle of construction applicable to any sort of estab-
lishment, in which persons of any description are to be kept under inspection; and in particular to
Penitentiary-houses, Prisons, Houses of industry, Workhouses, Poor Houses, Manufactories,
Madhouses, Lazarettos, Hospitals, and Schools; with a plan of management adapted to the principle;
in a series of letters, written in 1787, from Crechoff in White Russia, to a friend in England (in one
volume, Dublin: Thomas Byrne, 1791; and in two volumes, London: T. Payne, 1791),
included in Jeremy Bentham, Works, ed. John Bowring (Edinburgh: W. Tait, 1838–1843)
vol. IV, pp. 37–66 (see especially letters 16 to 21). The most recent, and readily available,
edition of the Panopticon Letters is Jeremy Bentham, The Panopticon Writings,
ed. M. Boz̆ovic̆ (New York and London: Verso, 1995); French translation by M. Sissung
in J. Bentham, Le Panoptique (Paris: Belfond, 1977) pp. 97–168. The French translation
of 1791 did not include the 21 letters and its title was less explicit: Panoptique, Mémoire sur
un nouveau principe pour construire des maisons d’inspection, et nommément des maisons de force24 January 1979
26.
27.
28.
29.
30.
31.
32.
73
(Paris: Imprimerie nationale). See Le Pouvoir psychiatrique. Cours au Collège de France,
1973–1974, ed. J. Lagrange (Paris: Gallimard-Le Seuil, 2003), lecture of 28 November
1973, pp. 75–76; English translation by Graham Burchell, Psychiatric Power. Lectures at the
Collège de France 1973–1974, English series ed. Arnold I. Davidson (London: Palgrave
Macmillan, 2006) pp. 73–75.
Foucault is no doubt referring to the Constitutional Code in The Collected Works of Jeremy
Bentham, eds. F. Rosen and J.H. Burns (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1983) vol. 1, although this
is not, strictly speaking, a codification of English legislation. Bentham develops his theory
of liberal government in this book, whose genesis goes back to the 1820s (see Codification
Proposal, Addressed to All Nations Professing Liberal Opinions, London: J. M’Creery, 1822),
and the first volume of which appeared in 1830 (Constitutional Code for Use of all Nations
Professing Liberal Opinions, London: R. Heward).
It seems that this phrase is not Bentham’s, but translates Foucault’s fairly free interpreta-
tion of Bentham’s political-economic thought after 1811 (date of the failure of the
Panopticon). Foucault seems to make a kind of short-cut between the distinction
agenda/non-agenda referred to several times in the lectures (see the lectures of 10 January
1979, above p. 12, 14 February 1979, below p. 133, and 7 March, below p. 195) and the prin-
ciple of inspection, or supervision, applied to government. In the Constitutional Code, how-
ever, government itself is the object of inspection on the part of the “tribunal of public
opinion.” (See Le Pouvoir psychiatrique, lecture of 28 November 1973, p. 78; Psychiatric Power,
p. 77, with regard to the democratization of the exercise of power in terms of the panoptic
apparatus: the accent is put on visibility, not on control through “publicity”). What’s
more, it is not clear that Bentham, in his economic writings or in the Constitutional Code, is
a partisan of economic laissez-faire, as Foucault suggests here (see L.J. Hume, “Jeremy
Bentham and the nineteenth-century revolution in government,” The Historical Journal, vol.
10 (3), 1967, pp. 361–375). Compare however with the sponte acta defined in the text of
1801–1804 (see above, lecture of 10 January, note 9).
This was, of course, the economic and social program of struggle against the crisis, the New
Deal, developed by Franklin Roosevelt immediately after his election as President of the
U.S. in November 1932.
Foucault says, “the Tricontinental.” Founded in 1973, the Trilateral Commission, which
brought together representatives of North America (the U.S. and Canada), Europe, and
Japan, with the objective of strengthening cooperation between these three major zones to
confront the new challenges of the end of the century. The “Tricontinental,” on the other
hand, is the name of the conference called by Fidel Castro in Havana, from December 1965
to January 1966, to facilitate a face to face encounter between revolutionary organizations
of the Old and New Worlds.
See below, lectures of 31 January, and 7, 14, and 21 February 1979.
See below, lectures of 14 and 21 March 1979.
See below, lecture of 31 January 1979, note 10.This page intentionally left blankfour
31 January 1979
[ ]
Phobia of the state. ⵑ Questions of method: sense and stakes
of the bracketing off of a theory of the state in the analysis of
mechanisms of power. ⵑ Neo-liberal governmental practices:
German liberalism from 1948 to 1962; American neo-liberalism.
ⵑ German neo-liberalism (I). ⵑ Its political-economic context.
ⵑ The scientific council brought together by Erhard in 1947. Its
program: abolition of price controls and limitation of governmental
interventions. ⵑ The middle way defined by Erhard in 1948
between anarchy and the “termite state.” ⵑ Its double meaning:
(a) respect for economic freedom as condition of the state’s political
representativity; (b) the institution of economic freedom as basis
for the formation of political sovereignty. ⵑ Fundamental
characteristic of contemporary German governmentality: economic
freedom, the source of juridical legitimacy and political consensus.
ⵑEconomic growth, axis of a new historical consciousness enabling
the break with the past. ⵑ Rallying of Christian Democracy and
the SPD to liberal politics. ⵑ The principles of liberal government
and the absence of a socialist governmental rationality.
I AM SURE YOU have all heard of the art historian, Berenson. 1 He was
almost one hundred years old, approaching death, when he said some-
thing like: “God knows I fear the destruction of the world by the atomic
bomb, but there is at least one thing I fear as much, and that is the
invasion of humanity by the state.” 2 I think this is the purest, clearest76
t h e b i rt h o f b i o p o l i t i c s
expression of a state-phobia one of the most constant features of which
is its coupling with fear of the atomic bomb. The state and the atomic
bomb, or rather the bomb than the state, or the state is no better than
the bomb, or the state entails the bomb, or the bomb entails and neces-
sarily calls for the state: this familiar theme is not that recent since
Berenson expressed it around 1950–1952. This state-phobia runs
through many contemporary themes and has undoubtedly been sus-
tained by many sources for a long time: the Soviet experience of the
1920s, the German experience of Nazism, English post-war planning,
and so on. The phobia has also had many agents and promoters, from
economics professors inspired by Austrian neo-marginalism, 3 to politi-
cal exiles who, from 1920, 1925 have certainly played a major role in the
formation of contemporary political consciousness, and a role that per-
haps has not been studied closely. An entire political history of exile
could be written, or a history of political exile and its ideological, theo-
retical, and practical effects. Political exile at the end of the nineteenth
century was certainly one of the major agents of the spread of socialism,
and I think twentieth century political exile, or political dissidence, has
also been a significant agent of the spread of what could be called anti-
statism, or state-phobia.
To tell the truth, I do not want to talk about this state-phobia
directly and head on, because for me it seems above all to be one of the
signs of the crises of governmentality I was talking about last week, of
those crises of governmentality of the sixteenth century, which I spoke
about last year, 4 and of the second half of the eighteenth century, which
manifests itself in that immense, difficult, and tangled criticism of
despotism, tyranny, and arbitrariness. Well, just as at the end of the
eighteenth century there was a criticism of despotism and a phobia
about despotism—an ambiguous phobia about despotism—so too today
there is a phobia about the state which is perhaps also ambiguous.
Anyway, I would like to take up this problem of the state, or the
question of the state, or state-phobia, on the basis of the analysis of
governmentality that I have already talked about.
You will, of course, put to me the question, or make the objection:
Once again you do without a theory of the state. Well, I would reply, yes,
I do, I want to, I must do without a theory of the state, as one can and31 January 1979
77
must forgo an indigestible meal. What does doing without a theory of
the state mean? If you say that in my analyses I cancel the presence and
the effect of state mechanisms, then I would reply: Wrong, you are mis-
taken or want to deceive yourself, for to tell the truth I do exactly the
opposite of this. Whether in the case of madness, of the constitution of
that category, that quasi-natural object, mental illness, or of the organ-
ization of a clinical medicine, or of the integration of disciplinary mech-
anisms and technologies within the penal system, what was involved in
each case was always the identification of the gradual, piecemeal, but
continuous takeover by the state of a number of practices, ways of doing
things, and, if you like, governmentalities. The problem of bringing
under state control, of ‘statification’ (étatisation) is at the heart of the
questions I have tried to address.
However, if, on the other hand, “doing without a theory of the state”
means not starting off with an analysis of the nature, structure, and
functions of the state in and for itself, if it means not starting from the
state considered as a sort of political universal and then, through succes-
sive extension, deducing the status of the mad, the sick, children, delin-
quents, and so on, in our kind of society then I reply: Yes, of course, I am
determined to refrain from that kind of analysis. There is no question of
deducing this set of practices from a supposed essence of the state in and
for itself. We must refrain from this kind of analysis first of all because,
quite simply, history is not a deductive science, and secondly, for
another no doubt more important and serious reason: the state does not
have an essence. The state is not a universal nor in itself an autonomous
source of power. The state is nothing else but the effect, the profile, the
mobile shape of a perpetual statification (étatisation) or statifications, in
the sense of incessant transactions which modify, or move, or drastically
change, or insidiously shift sources of finance, modes of investment,
decision-making centers, forms and types of control, relationships
between local powers, the central authority, and so on. In short, the state
has no heart, as we well know, but not just in the sense that it has no
feelings, either good or bad, but it has no heart in the sense that it has
no interior. The state is nothing else but the mobile effect of a regime of
multiple governmentalities. That is why I propose to analyze, or rather
to take up and test this anxiety about the state, this state-phobia, which78
t h e b i rt h o f b i o p o l i t i c s
seems to me a typical feature of common themes today, not by trying to
wrest from the state the secret of what it is, like Marx tried to extract
the secret of the commodity, but by moving outside and questioning the
problem of the state, undertaking an investigation of the problem of the
state, on the basis of practices of governmentality.
Having said that, in this perspective, and continuing with the analy-
sis of liberal governmentality, I would like to see how it appears and
reflects on itself, how at the same time it is brought into play and ana-
lyzes itself, how, in short, it currently programs itself. I have indicated
some of what seem to me to be the, as it were, first characteristics of lib-
eral governmentality as it appeared in the middle of the eighteenth cen-
tury. So I will skip two centuries, because obviously I do not claim to be
able to undertake the overall, general, and continuous history of liberal-
ism from the eighteenth to the twentieth century. Starting from how
liberal governmentality is currently programming itself, I would just
like to pick out and clarify some problems which recur from the eigh-
teenth to the twentieth century. More or less, and subject to the qualifi-
cation that I may change the plan—because, as you know, I am like the
crawfish and advance sideways—I think, I hope we can study succes-
sively the problem of law and order,* the opposition between the state
and civil society, or rather the way in which this opposition functioned
and was employed, and then, finally, if I am lucky, we will come to the
problem of biopolitics and the problem of life. Law and order, the state
and civil society, and politics of life: these are the three themes that I
would like to pick out in this broad and lengthy history of two centuries
of liberalism. 5
So, let’s take things as they stand now. What is the nature of today’s
liberal, or, as one says, neo-liberal program? You know that it is identi-
fied in two main forms, with different cornerstones and historical con-
texts. The German form is linked to the Weimar Republic, the crisis of
1929, the development of Nazism, the critique of Nazism, and, finally,
post-war reconstruction. The other, American form, is a neo-liberalism
defined by reference to the New Deal, the criticism of Roosevelt’s 6
* In English in original; G.B.31 January 1979
79
policies, and which, especially after the war, is developed and organized
against federal interventionism, and then against the aid and other pro-
grams of the mainly Democrat administrations of Truman, 7 Kennedy, 8
Johnson, 9 etcetera. There are, of course, a number of connections
between these two forms of neo-liberalism, which I have cut out with
somewhat arbitrary slices. First of all there is the main doctrinal adver-
sary, Keynes, 10 the common enemy, which ensures that criticism of
Keynes will pass back and forth between these two neo-liberalisms.
Second, they share the same objects of repulsion, namely, the state-
controlled economy, planning, and state interventionism on precisely
those overall quantities to which Keynes attached such theoretical and
especially practical importance. Finally, a series of persons, theories, and
books pass between these two forms of neo-liberalism, the main ones
referring to the Austrian school broadly speaking, to Austrian neo-
marginalism, at any rate to those who came from there, like von Mises, 11
Hayek, 12 and so on. I would like to talk above all about the first, about,
to put it very roughly, German neo-liberalism, both because it seems to
me to be more important theoretically than the others for the problem
of governmentality, and also because I am not sure I will have enough
time to talk about the Americans.
So let’s take the example of German neo-liberalism. 13 It’s April
1948—fine, I’m ashamed to remind you of things so well known—and
throughout Europe economic policies governed by a series of well-
known requirements reign almost unchallenged:
First, the requirement of reconstruction, that is to say, the conversion
of a war economy back into a peace economy, the reconstruction of
destroyed economic potential, and also the integration of new techno-
logical information which appeared during the war, and new demo-
graphic and geopolitical facts.
The second requirement is that of planning as the major instrument
of reconstruction. Planning is required both due to internal necessities
and also because of the weight represented by America and American
policy and the existence of the Marshall plan, 14 which practically
entailed—except precisely for Germany and Belgium, to which we will
return shortly—the planning of each country and a degree of coordination
between the different plans.80
t h e b i rt h o f b i o p o l i t i c s
Finally, the third requirement is constituted by social objectives that
were considered to be politically indispensable in order to avoid the
renewal of fascism and Nazism in Europe. In France this requirement
was formulated by the CNR. 15
With these three requirements—reconstruction, planning, and,
broadly speaking, socialization and social objectives—all of which
entailed an interventionist policy on the allocations of resources, price
stability, the level of savings, the choice of investments, and a policy of
full employment, we are, in short—and once again, please forgive all
these banalities—in the middle of a fully-fledged Keynesian policy. Now,
in April 1948, a Scientific Council 16 formed alongside the German
economic administration in what was called the Bi-Zone, that is to say,
the Anglo-American zone, presented a report which laid down the fol-
lowing principle: “The Council is of the view that the function of the
direction of the economic process should be assured as widely as possi-
ble by the price mechanism.” 17 It turned out that this resolution or
principle was accepted unanimously. And the Council voted by a simple
majority for drawing the following consequence from this principle: We
call for the immediate deregulation of prices in order [to bring prices in
line with]* world prices. So, broadly speaking, there is the principle of
no price controls and the demand for immediate deregulation. We are in
the realm of decisions, or of demands anyway, a realm of proposals that,
in its elementary simplicity, calls to mind what the physiocrats called for
or what Turgot decided in 1774. 18 This took place on 18 April 1948. Ten
days later, the 28th, at the meeting of the Council at Frankfurt, 19
Ludwig Erhard 20 —who was not in charge of the Scientific Council, for
it had come together around him, but of the economic administration of
the Anglo-American zone, or at any rate of the German part of the eco-
nomic administration of the zone—gave a speech in which he took up
the conclusions of this report. 21 That is to say, he laid down the princi-
ple of no price controls and called for gradual deregulation, but he
accompanied this principle, and the conclusion he drew from it, with a
number of important considerations. He says: “We must free the
* M.F.: to obtain a tendential alignment with31 January 1979
81
economy from state controls.” 22 “We must avoid,” he says, “both anarchy
and the termite state,” because “only a state that establishes both the
freedom and responsibility of the citizens can legitimately speak in the
name of the people.” 23 You can see that this economic liberalism, this
principle of respect for the market economy that was formulated by the
Scientific Council, is inscribed within something much more general,
and this is a principle according to which interventions by the state
should generally be limited. The borders and limits of state control
should be precisely fixed and relations between individuals and the state
determined. Ludwig Erhard’s speech clearly differentiates these liberal
choices, which he was about to propose to the Frankfurt meeting, from
some other economic experiments that managed to be undertaken at
this time despite the dirigiste, interventionist, and Keynesian ambiance in
Europe. That is to say, a liberal policy was also adopted in Belgium, and
partially too in Italy where, spurred on by Luigi Einaudi, 24 who was
then the director of the Bank of Italy, a number of liberal measures were
adopted. But in Belgium and Italy these were specifically economic
interventions. In Erhard’s speech, and in the choices he proposed at that
time, there was something quite different. What was at stake, and the
text itself says this, was the legitimacy of the state.
What does Ludwig Erhard mean when he says that we must free the
economy from state controls while avoiding anarchy and the termite
state, because “only a state that establishes both the freedom and
responsibility of the citizens can legitimately speak in the name of the
people”? Actually, it is fairly ambiguous, in the sense that I think it can
and should be understood at two levels. On the one hand, at a trivial
level, if you like, it is simply a matter of saying that a state which abuses
its power in the economic realm, and more generally in the realm of
political life, violates basic rights, impairs essential freedoms, and
thereby forfeits its own rights. A state cannot exercise its power legiti-
mately if it violates the freedom of individuals; it forfeits its rights. The
text does not say that it forfeits all its rights. It does not say, for exam-
ple, that it is stripped of its rights of sovereignty. It says that it forfeits
its rights of representativity. That is to say, a state which violates the
basic freedoms, the essential rights of citizens, is no longer representa-
tive of its citizens. We can see what the precise tactical objective of this82
t h e b i rt h o f b i o p o l i t i c s
kind of statement is in reality: it amounts to saying that the National
Socialist state, which violated all these rights, was not, could not be seen
retrospectively as not having exercised its sovereignty legitimately. That
is to say, roughly, that the orders, laws, and regulations imposed on
German citizens are not invalidated and, as a result, the Germans
cannot be held responsible for what was done in the legislative or regu-
latory framework of Nazism. However, on the other hand, it was and is
retrospectively stripped of its rights of representativity. That is to say,
what it did cannot be considered as having been done in the name of the
German people. The whole, extremely difficult problem of the legiti-
macy and legal status to be given to the measures taken [under] Nazism
are present in this statement.
But there is [also] a broader, more general, and at the same time
more sophisticated meaning to Ludwig Erhard’s statement that only a
state that recognizes economic freedom and thus makes way for the free-
dom and responsibility of individuals can speak in the name of the
people. Basically, Erhard is saying that in the current state of affairs—that
is to say, in 1948, before the German state had been reconstituted, before
the two German states had been constituted—it is clearly not possible to
lay claim to historical rights for a not yet reconstituted Germany and for
a still to be reconstituted German state, when these rights are debarred
by history itself. It is not possible to claim juridical legitimacy inasmuch
as no apparatus, no consensus, and no collective will can manifest itself in
a situation in which Germany is on the one hand divided, and on the
other occupied. So, there are no historical rights, there is no juridical
legitimacy, on which to found a new German state.
But—and this is what Ludwig Erhard’s text says implicitly—let’s
suppose an institutional framework whose nature or origin is not
important: an institutional framework x. Let us suppose that the func-
tion of this institutional framework x is not, of course, to exercise sover-
eignty, since, precisely, there is nothing in the current situation that can
found a juridical power of coercion, but is simply to guarantee freedom.
So, its function is not to constrain, but simply to create a space of free-
dom, to guarantee a freedom, and precisely to guarantee it in the eco-
nomic domain. Let us now suppose that in this institution x—whose
function is not the sovereign exercise of the power to constrain, but31 January 1979
83
simply to establish a space of freedom—any number of individuals freely
agree to play this game of economic freedom guaranteed by the institu-
tional framework. What will happen? What would be implied by the
free exercise of this freedom by individuals who are not constrained to
exercise it but who have simply been given the possibility of exercising
it? Well, it would imply adherence to this framework; it would imply
that consent has been given to any decision which may be taken to
guarantee this economic freedom or to secure that which makes this
economic freedom possible. In other words, the institution of economic
freedom will have to function, or at any rate will be able to function as
a siphon, as it were, as a point of attraction for the formation of a polit-
ical sovereignty. Of course, I am adding to Ludwig Erhard’s apparently
banal words a whole series of implicit meanings which will only take on
their value and effect later. I am adding a whole historical weight that is
not yet present, but I will try to explain how and why this meaning,
which is at once theoretical, political, and programmatic, really was in
the minds of those who wrote this discourse, if not in the mind of the
one who actually delivered it.
I think this idea of a legitimizing foundation of the state on the guar-
anteed exercise of an economic freedom is important. Of course, we must
take up this idea and its formulation in the precise context in which it
appears, and straightaway it is easy to see tactical and strategic shrewd-
ness. It was a matter of finding a juridical expedient in order to ask from
an economic regime what could not be directly asked from constitu-
tional law, or from international law, or even quite simply from the
political partners. Even more precisely, it was an artful move with regard
to both the Americans and Europe, since by guaranteeing economic
freedom to a Germany in the process of reconstruction and prior to any
state apparatus, the Americans, and let’s say different American lobbies
were assured that they could have the free relationships that they could
choose with this German industry and economy. Secondly, both Western
and Eastern Europe were reassured by ensuring that the institutional
embryo being formed presented absolutely none of the dangers of the
strong or totalitarian state they had experienced in the previous years.
But beyond these immediate tactical imperatives, and beyond the imme-
diate context and situation of 1948, I think there was the formulation in84
t h e b i rt h o f b i o p o l i t i c s
this discourse of something which will remain a fundamental feature of
contemporary German governmentality*: we should not think that
economic activity in contemporary Germany, that is to say, for thirty
years, from 1948 until today, has been only one branch of the nation’s
activity. We should not think that good economic management has had
no other effect and no other foreseen and calculated end than that of
securing the prosperity of all and each. In fact, in contemporary
Germany, the economy, economic development and economic growth,
produces sovereignty; it produces political sovereignty through the insti-
tution and institutional game that, precisely, makes this economy work.
The economy produces legitimacy for the state that is its guarantor. In
other words, the economy creates public law, and this is an absolutely
important phenomenon, which is not entirely unique in history to be
sure, but is nonetheless a quite singular phenomenon in our times. In
contemporary Germany there is a circuit going constantly from the eco-
nomic institution to the state; and if there is an inverse circuit going
from the state to the economic institution, it should not be forgotten
that the element that comes first in this kind of siphon is the economic
institution. There is a permanent genesis, a permanent genealogy of the
state from the economic institution. And even this is not saying enough,
for the economy does not only bring a juridical structure or legal legit-
imization to a German state that history had just debarred. This eco-
nomic institution, the economic freedom that from the start it is the role
of this institution to guarantee and maintain, produces something even
more real, concrete, and immediate than a legal legitimization; it pro-
duces a permanent consensus of all those who may appear as agents
within these economic processes, as investors, workers, employers, and
trade unions. All these economic partners produce a consensus, which is
a political consensus, inasmuch as they accept this economic game of
freedom.
Let’s say that in leaving people free to act, the German neo-liberal
institution lets them speak, and to a large extent it lets them act because
* Foucault adds: for there is here, I think, one of the essential features on which we should
reflect and the programming of which seems to me to be one of the fundamental features of this
German neo-liberalism.31 January 1979
85
it wants to let them speak; but what does it let them say? Well, it lets
them say that one is right to give them freedom to act. That is to say, over
and above juridical legitimation, adherence to this liberal system pro-
duces permanent consensus as a surplus product, and, symmetrically to
the genealogy of the state from the economic institution, the production
of well-being by economic growth will produce a circuit going from the
economic institution to the population’s overall adherence to its regime
and system.
If we believe historians of the sixteenth century, like Max Weber, 25 it
would seem that the enrichment of an individual in sixteenth century
protestant Germany was a sign of God’s arbitrary election of that indi-
vidual. What did wealth signify? Wealth was a sign that God really had
granted his protection to that individual and that he showed by this
the certainty of a salvation which could not be guaranteed by anything
in the individual’s real and concrete works. You will not be saved
because you have tried to enrich yourself as you should, but if in actual
fact you have become rich, this is a sign sent to you on earth by God
that you will be saved. So, enrichment enters into a system of signs in
sixteenth century Germany. In twentieth century Germany, an individ-
ual’s enrichment will not be the arbitrary sign of his election by God,
but general enrichment will be the sign of something else: not, of
course, of God’s election, [but] the daily sign of the adherence of indi-
viduals to the state. In other words, the economy always signifies, but
not at all in the sense that it endlessly produces those signs of the
equivalence and exchange value of things, which, in its illusory struc-
tures, or its structures of the simulacrum, has nothing to do with the
use of things. The economy produces political signs that enable
the structures, mechanisms, and justifications of power to function.
The free market, the economically free market, binds and manifests
political bonds. A strong Deutschmark, a satisfactory rate of growth,
an expanding purchasing power, and a favorable balance of payments
are, of course, the effects of good government in contemporary
Germany, but to a certain extent this is even more the way in which the
founding consensus of a state—which history, defeat, or the decision of
the victors had just outlawed—is constantly manifested and reinforced.
The state rediscovers its law, its juridical law, and its real foundation in86
t h e b i rt h o f b i o p o l i t i c s
the existence and practice of economic freedom. History had said no to
the German state, but now the economy will allow it to assert itself.
Continuous economic growth will take over from a malfunctioning his-
tory. It will thus be possible to live and accept the breach of history as
a breach in memory, inasmuch as a new dimension of temporality will
be established in Germany that will no longer be a temporality of
history, but one of economic growth. A reversal of the axis of time, per-
mission to forget, and economic growth are all, I think, at the very heart
of the way in which the German economic-political system functions.
Economic freedom is jointly produced through growth, well-being, the
state, and the forgetting of history.
In contemporary Germany we have what we can say is a radically
economic state, taking the word “radically” in the strict sense, that is
to say, its root is precisely economic. As you know, Fichte—and this is
generally all that is known about Fichte—spoke of a closed commercial
state. 26 I will have to come back to this a bit later. 27 I will just say, mak-
ing a somewhat artificial symmetry, that we have here the opposite of a
closed commercial state. We have a state-forming commercial opening.
Is this the first example in history of a radically economic state? We
would have to ask historians who have a much better understanding of
history than I do. Was Venice a radically economic state? Can we say
that the United Provinces in the sixteenth century, and still in the sev-
enteenth century, were an economic state? Anyway, we are dealing with
something new in comparison with everything that since the eigh-
teenth century constituted the functioning, justification, and program-
ming of governmentality. If it is true that we are still dealing with a
liberal type of governmentality, you can see the shift that has been car-
ried out in relation to the liberalism programmed by the physiocrats,
Turgot, and the economists of the eighteenth century, for whom the
problem was exactly the opposite. The problem they had to resolve was
the following: given the existence of a legitimate state, which is already
functioning in the fully and completely administrative form of a police
state, how can we limit this existing state and, above all, allow for the
necessary economic freedom within it? The problem the Germans had
to resolve was the exact opposite: given a state that does not exist, how31 January 1979
87
can we get it to exist on the basis of this non-state space of economic
freedom?
I think this is the kind of commentary we can give on the apparently
banal little sentence of the future Chancellor Erhard on 28 April 1948
(once again, giving a lot of extra weight to this phrase, but extra
weight which I will try to show is not arbitrary). Obviously, this idea,
this formulation of 1948, could only take on this historical depth by
being very quickly inscribed in a sequence of subsequent decisions and
events.
So, on 18 April there is the report of the Scientific Council; on
28 April Erhard’s discourse; on 24 June 1948, 28 abolition of price con-
trols on industrial products, then of price controls on food, and then
progressively, but relatively slowly, of all price controls. In 1952 price
controls are abolished on coal and electricity, which is, I think, one of
the last price controls to be abolished in Germany. And it is only in 1953
that there is removal of exchange controls for foreign trade that reaches
the level of around 80%-95%. So, in 1952–1953 liberalization is more
or less established.
Another thing to note is that this policy of liberalization, more or
less explicitly supported by the Americans for the reasons I mentioned,
aroused considerable mistrust on the part of the other occupying pow-
ers, particularly the English who were in a period of fully-fledged
Labour Party Keynesianism. 29 It aroused considerable resistance in
Germany itself, since, of course, prices began to rise as soon as the first
price controls were abolished. The German socialists demanded
Erhard’s resignation in August 1948 and in November of the same year
there was a general strike against Erhard’s economic policy and a call for
a return to a state-controlled economy. The strike failed and prices
stabilized in December 1948. 30
The third series of important facts for pinpointing the way in which
the neo-liberal program I have been talking about was inscribed in real-
ity was a rallying of support for it on the part of a number of organiza-
tions and people. First of all, and very early on, there was support from
the Christian Democrats, in spite of its stronger links with a Christian,
social economy than with a liberal type of economy. With the Christian88
t h e b i rt h o f b i o p o l i t i c s
Democrats came Christian theorists of the social economy and in
particular those of Munich, the famous Jesuit Oswald Nell-Breuning, 31
who taught political economy at Munich. 32 The support of the labor
unions was, of course, much more important. The first major, most offi-
cial and most manifest case of adherence to the program being that of
Theodor Blank, 33 who was vice president of the miners’ union and who
declared that the liberal order constitutes a valid alternative to capitalism
and economic planning. 34 It could be said that this phrase is completely
hypocritical or naively plays on a number of ambiguities: in fact, in say-
ing that the liberal order constituted an alternative to capitalism and eco-
nomic planning, you can see the asymmetries on which he was playing,
since the liberal order never claimed, or was certainly not claiming
through the mouth of the future chancellor Erhard to be an alternative to
capitalism, but was indeed a particular way of making capitalism work.
And if it is true that he was opposed to planning, someone like Theodor
Blank, as a trade union representative on the one hand, and with his
social Christian origins and ideology, etcetera, on the other, could not
criticize it all that directly. And, in fact, what he meant was that in neo-
liberalism there was the finally fulfilled promise of a middle way or third
order between capitalism and socialism. Once again, this was not what
was at stake at all. The phrase was simply [intended] to get the Christian
inspired trade unions of the time to swallow the pill.
Finally and above all, the SPD, social democracy, came over to the
program, although obviously it did so much more slowly than the oth-
ers since practically until 1950 German social democracy remained
faithful to most of what had been its general principles of Marxist
inspired socialism since the end of the nineteenth century. At the
Hanover Congress, 35 and again at the Bad Dürkheim Congress in 1949,
the German Socialist Party still recognized the historical and political
validity of the class struggle and had the socialization of the means of
production as its objective. 36 Fine, this is still how things stand in 1949,
in 1950. In 1955, Karl Schiller, 37 who will later become Minister of the
Economy and Finance in federal Germany, 38 writes a book that will
cause a big stir since it bears the significant title Socialism and
Competition, 39 that is to say, not socialism or competition, but socialism31 January 1979
89
and competition. I don’t know if he states it for the first time in this
book, but anyway he gives the greatest publicity to what will become the
formula of German socialism: “as much competition as possible and as
much planning as necessary.” 40 This is in 1955. In 1959, at the Bad
Godesberg congress, 41 German social democracy first renounced the
principle of transition to the socialization of the means of production
and, secondly and correlatively, recognized that not only was private
ownership of the means of production perfectly legitimate, but that it
had a right to state protection and encouragement. 42 That is to say, one
of the state’s essential and basic tasks is to protect not only private
property in general, but private property in the means of production,
with the condition, adds the motion of the congress, of compatibility
with “an equitable social order.” Finally, third, the congress approved
the principle of a market economy, here again with the restriction,
wherever “the conditions of genuine competition prevail.” 43
Clearly, for anyone who thinks in Marxist terms, or on the basis of
Marxism, or on the basis of the tradition of German socialism, what is
important in these motions is obviously the series of renunciations—
desertions, heresies, betrayals, as you like—of the class struggle, of the
social appropriation of the means of production, and so on. From an
orthodox Marxist perspective it is these renunciations which are
important and all the rest, all these vague little restrictions like aiming
for an equitable social order, or realizing the conditions of genuine com-
petition, is just so much hypocrisy. But for someone who hears these
same phrases with a different ear or on the basis of a different theoreti-
cal “background,” these words—“equitable social order,” “condition of
genuine economic competition”—resonate very differently because they
indicate—and here again is something that I would like to explain next
week—adherence to a doctrinal and programmatic whole which is not
simply an economic theory on the effectiveness and utility of market
freedom: it is adherence to a type of governmentality that was precisely
the means by which the German economy served as the basis for the
legitimate state.
Why did German social democracy finally come over, albeit some-
what late, but fairly easily, to these theses, practices, and programs of90
t h e b i rt h o f b i o p o l i t i c s
neo-liberalism? There are at least two reasons. One, of course, was a nec-
essary and indispensable reason of political tactics. You can see that as
long as the SPD, under the leadership of the old Schumacher, 44 main-
tained the traditional attitude of a socialist party—on the one hand
accepting the system of the state, of the constitution and juridical struc-
tures of the so-called liberal democratic regime, while, on the other,
rejecting in theory the principles of the capitalist economic system, thus
adopting the task within this legal framework, seen as sufficient for
developing the basic role of essential freedoms, of simply correcting the
existing system in terms of a number of distant objectives—it could have
no place in the new economic-political state that was being born. There
could be no place for it precisely because the new state was the opposite
of this. It was not a matter of choosing or accepting a legal framework or
a given historical framework because it had been formed in that way by
the state or by popular consensus, and then working within, economi-
cally, at a number of adjustments. It was quite the opposite. In the new
German economic-political regime one started by giving oneself a cer-
tain economic functioning which was the very basis of the state and of
its existence and international recognition. One gave oneself this eco-
nomic framework, and it is then that the legitimacy of the state emerged
as it were. How could a socialist party, whose at least long-term objec-
tive is a completely different economic regime, be integrated into this
political game, since the givens had been reversed, so to speak, and it
was the economic that was radical in relation to the state, and not the
state that was primary as the historical-juridical framework for this or
that economic choice? Consequently, to enter into the political game of
the new Germany, the SPD really had to convert to these neo-liberal
theses, if not to the economic, scientific, or theoretical theses, at least to
the general practice of this neo-liberalism as governmental practice.
Thus the famous Bad Godesberg congress with its absolute renunciation
of the most traditional themes of social democracy certainly was the
break with Marxist theory, with Marxist socialism, but at the same
time it was—and this was not just a betrayal, except, if you like, in gen-
eral historical terms—the acceptance of what was already in the process
of functioning as the economic-political consensus of German liberal-
ism. It was not so much the renunciation of this or that part of the31 January 1979
91
program common to most socialist parties as entry into the game of gov-
ernmentality. There remains one more step for social democracy to make,
and this was the break with the English model and any reference to
Keynesian economics. This step was taken by Karl Schiller, him again,
in 1963, since he even abandons the formula: “as much competition as
possible and as much planning as necessary.” In 1963 he asserts the
principle that all, even flexible planning is dangerous for the liberal
economy. 45 At this point social democracy has arrived; it has entered
fully into the type of economic-political governmentality that was
adopted by Germany in 1948. It joins in the game so well that six years
later Willy Brandt 46 becomes Chancellor of Federal Germany.
This is, for sure, one of the reasons, and not the least, but I think we
should try to examine further this problem of the relation between
German socialism and the neo-liberal governmentality defined by
Erhard in 1948, or at least by his counselors about whom I spoke a lit-
tle last week. We can try to understand a bit better what happened and
why it happened in this way. Actually, there is no doubt another reason
than this kind of tactical stranglehold in which the German socialist
party found itself after 1948. It is often said, well, at least by those
who know his work, that there is no theory of power in Marx, that the
theory of the state is inadequate, and that it really is time to produce it.
But is it really so important to provide oneself with a theory of the
state? After all, the English have not done so badly and, at least until
these last few years, have been tolerably well-governed without a theory
of the state. At any rate, the last of the theories of the state is found in
Hobbes, 47 that is to say, in someone who was both the contemporary and
“supporter” of a type of monarchy that the English precisely got rid of
at that time. After Hobbes, there is Locke. 48 Locke does not produce a
theory of the state; he produces a theory of government. So, we can say
that the English political system has never functioned, and liberal
doctrine has never functioned on the basis of, or even by providing
itself with a theory of the state. They have adopted principles of
government.
In short, whether or not there is a theory of the state in Marx is for
Marxists to decide. As for myself, I would say that what socialism lacks
is not so much a theory of the state as a governmental reason, the92
t h e b i rt h o f b i o p o l i t i c s
definition of what a governmental rationality would be in socialism,
that is to say, a reasonable and calculable measure of the extent, modes,
and objectives of governmental action. Socialism provides itself with, or
anyway proposes, an historical rationality. You know this and there’s no
point saying anything more about it. It proposes an economic rational-
ity. God knows how much discussion there has been about whether or
not this rationality holds up, especially in the years from 1920 to 1930.
Around this period the neo-liberals I have talked about, like von
Mises, Hayek, and so on, especially von Mises, 49 denied that there was
an economic rationality to socialism. Others replied to him, and we
will come back to this. Let’s say that the problem of the economic
rationality of socialism is something about which we can argue. In any
case, socialism offers an economic rationality just as it puts forward an
historical rationality. We can also say that it possesses, and has shown
that it possesses, rational techniques of intervention, of administrative
intervention, in domains like those of health, social insurance, and so
on. So, it is possible to recognize the existence of an historical rational-
ity, an economic rationality, and an administrative rationality in social-
ism, or, at any rate, let’s say that we can argue about the existence of
these rationalities in socialism and we cannot eliminate all these forms
of rationality with a wave of the hand. But I do not think that there is
an autonomous socialist governmentality. There is no governmental
rationality of socialism. In actual fact, and history has shown this,
socialism can only be implemented connected up to diverse types of
governmentality. It has been connected up to liberal governmentality,
and then socialism and its forms of rationality function as counter-
weights, as a corrective, and a palliative to internal dangers. One can,
moreover, [reproach it, as do liberals],* with being itself a danger, but
it has lived, it has actually functioned, and we have examples of it
within and connected up to liberal governmentalities. We have seen it
function, and still see it function, within governmentalities that would
no doubt fall more under what last year we called the police state, 50
that is to say, a hyper-administrative state in which there is, so to
* M.F.: liberals reproach it31 January 1979
93
speak, a fusion, a continuity, the constitution of a sort of massive bloc
between governmentality and administration. At that point, in the gov-
ernmentality of a police state, socialism functions as the internal logic
of an administrative apparatus. Maybe there are still other governmen-
talities that socialism is connected up to; it remains to be seen. But in
any case, I do not think that for the moment there is an autonomous
governmentality of socialism.
Let’s consider things from a different angle. When we cross the bor-
der separating the Germany of Helmut Schmidt 51 and the Germany of
[Erich Honecker 52 ],* the question every good Western intellectual asks
himself is, of course: Where is true socialism? Is it where I have just
come from, or there where I am going? Is it on the right or the left, on
this side or the other? Where is true socialism? † But does this question
have any meaning? Basically, should we not say instead that socialism is
no more true here than there for the simple reason that socialism does
not have to be true. What I mean is that socialism is anyway connected
up to a type of governmentality: here it is connected up to this govern-
mentality and there it is connected up to another, yielding very dissim-
ilar fruit in both cases and, in the event of course of a more or less
normal or aberrant branch, the same deadly fruit.
But do we address to liberalism the question which is always raised
within and with regard to socialism, namely: true or false? A form of
liberalism does not have to be true or false. One asks whether a form of
liberalism is pure, radical, consistent, or mixed, etcetera. That is to say,
we ask what rules it adopts for itself, how it offsets compensating
mechanisms, how it calculates the mechanisms of measurement it has
installed within its governmentality. I think that if we are so strongly
inclined to put to socialism this indiscreet question of truth that we
never address to liberalism—“Are you true or are you false?”—it is pre-
cisely because socialism lacks an intrinsic governmental rationality, and
because it replaces this essential, and still not overcome [absence of ] an
internal governmental rationality, with the relationship of conformity to
* M.F.: I have forgotten his name, but it’s not important.
†
Foucault repeats: Where is true socialism?94
t h e b i rt h o f b i o p o l i t i c s
a text. The relationship of conformity to a text, or to a series of texts, is
charged with concealing this absence of governmental rationality. A way
of reading and interpreting is advanced that must found socialism and
indicate the very limits and possibilities of its potential action, whereas
what it really needs is to define for itself its way of doing things and its
way of governing. I think the importance of the text in socialism is com-
mensurate with the lacuna constituted by the absence of a socialist art
of government. With regard to all forms of real socialism, of every social-
ism implemented in policy, we should not ask what text it refers to,
whether or not it betrays the text, whether or not it conforms to the
text, or whether it is true or false. We should simply and always ask
socialism: So, what is this necessarily extrinsic governmentality that
makes you function and only within which you can function? And if
this kind of question seems to smell too much of resentment, let us put
the question in a more general way, and more turned towards the future:
What would really be the governmentality appropriate to socialism? Is
there a governmentality appropriate to socialism? What governmental-
ity is possible as a strictly, intrinsically, and autonomously socialist gov-
ernmentality? In any case, we know only that if there is a really socialist
governmentality, then it is not hidden within socialism and its texts. It
cannot be deduced from them. It must be invented. 53 *
This, then, is the historical framework within which what is called
German neo-liberalism takes shape. You can see that we are dealing with
a whole set of things that it would be impossible to reduce to a pure and
simple calculation of political groups or political personnel of Germany
after its defeat, although the existence, pressure, and the possible
strategies defined by this situation were absolutely determinant. It is
something other than a political calculation, even if it is completely per-
meated by political calculation. No more is it an ideology, although, of
course, there is a whole set of perfectly coherent ideas, analytical princi-
ples, and so forth. What is involved in fact is a new programming of
liberal governmentality. It is an internal reorganization that, once again,
* In the manuscript Foucault notes: “Socialism is not the alternative to liberalism. They do not
exist on the same level, although there are levels at which they come into collision with each
other, where things don’t go well together. Hence the possibility of their unhappy symbiosis.”31 January 1979
95
does not ask the state what freedom it will leave to the economy, but
asks the economy how its freedom can have a state-creating function and
role, in the sense that it will really make possible the foundation of the
state’s legitimacy?
I will stop there.* So, next week I would like to talk about the for-
mation of this neo-liberal doctrine around 1925, and its implementation
from around 1952.
* Foucault forgoes reading the last pages of the manuscript (pp. 22–25):
“[p. 22] Reversal in comparison with the ‘liberalism’ defined by d’Argenson or Turgot.
—Take a state: if you want to enrich yourself, then you must not govern too much. Therefore,
freedom of the market.
—Take a state that does not exist. How to ensure that it exists just enough. Therefore, a free
market.
To get the legality of the state from the veridiction of the market: this is the German miracle.
[p. 23] There has been a precedent, the Zollverien, but precisely it was a failure. And German
nationalism was constructed against economic liberalism.
—either because it failed to defend itself against French imperialism: Fichte,
—or because, from 1840, the solidarity between economic and political liberalism unravels. The
liberal economic policy, from which German unity (against Austria) was expected, turns out to
serve England in fact. It is realized that unity can only be brought about by a revolutionary pol-
itics and that the economy must be inserted within the nationalist framework. List: National
Ökonomie.
[p. 24] N.B. Nationalism is only seen as an instrument → the future age of liberalism
—From 1870 economic liberalism/free market economy modeled on free competition was
rejected
—in the name of external policy: struggle against England; the free market is an instrument of
English domination;
—in the name of internal policy: the proletariat must be reintegrated into German society;
—in the name of the historicist doctrine that rejected the presupposition of nature, of natural
law, as the founding principle of an economy. The economy is only ever a dimension of succes-
sive historical configurations.
—finally, after 1918, liberalism is rejected.
—by the extension of a war economy and its methods of planning;
—by the development of a Welfare economy [English in original; G.B.] that seems to theorize and
justify Bismarckian practices on a new basis (or at least their [ ... ])
— [p. 25] finally by the development of the principle of a policy of full employment and state
intervention.
In short, an economy of balances [ ... ]
All of this constitutes an enormous burden, taken over by socialism. There had already been
attempts to lift it (Lujo Brentano). There were also theoretical instruments (Austrian). But
what is interesting is that the Freiburg School did not just develop an economic theory, or even
a doctrine. It completely rethought the relation between the economy and politics, the whole of
the art of government. And with good reason: it had to grapple with a considerable historical
phenomenon. Nazism, in fact, was not just the accumulation and crystallization of all the poli-
cies of nationalism, interventionism, and planning that had marginalized liberalism ... ” (end of
the manuscript).96
t h e b i rt h o f b i o p o l i t i c s
1. Bernard Berenson (1865–1959), American art collector, expert, and critic of Lithuanian
origin, and a specialist in Italian Renaissance painting. Author of: The Italian Painters of the
Renaissance (London: Phaidon Press, 1953); Drawings of the Florentine Painters (Chicago:
University of Chicago Press, 1970); and a book of memoirs, Sketch for a Self-Portrait
(New York: Pantheon, 1949).
2. The quotation is, as Foucault suggests, fairly free. The manuscript contains only: “Berenson:
atomic destruction, state invasion.”
3. These are named later in the lecture: von Mises, Hayek (see below, note 11).
4. See Sécurité, Territoire, Population, lecture of 1 February 1978, p. 105; Security, Territory,
Population, pp. 101–102.
5. Foucault will only deal with the first two points in the remainder of the course. See above,
lecture of 10 January 1979, pp. 21–22, the reasons he gives to justify their analysis, the con-
dition of the intelligibility of the third point (“only when we know what this governmen-
tal regime called liberalism was, will we be able to grasp what biopolitics is”) and his
comment right at the start of the lecture of 7 March 1979 (below p. 185): “I would like to
assure you that, in spite of everything, I really did intend to talk about biopolitics, and
then, things being what they are, I have ended up talking at length, and maybe for too long,
about neo-liberalism, and neo-liberalism in its German form.”
6. See above, p. 68.
7. Harry S. Truman (1884–1972), President of the United States from 1945 to 1953.
8. John F. Kennedy (1917–1963), President of the United States from 1961 to 1963.
9. Lyndon B. Johnson (1908–1973), President of the United States from 1963 to 1969.
10. John Maynard Keynes (1883–1946), British economist and author of A Treatise on Money
(London and New York: Harcourt, Brace & Co., 1930), and especially The General Theory
of Employment, Interest and Money (London: Macmillan & Co., 1936), French translation by
J. de Largentaye, Théorie générale de l’emploi, de l’intérêt et de la monnaie (Paris: Payot, 1942).
In the latter work, the publication of which marks a crucial date in the history of economic
thought (the “Keynesian revolution”), addressing the problem of under-employment and
criticizing in particular Pigou’s theory of unemployment (A.C. Pigou, The Theory of
Unemployment, London: Macmillan, 1933), Keynes explained the contemporary crisis of
capitalism by the fall in marginal efficiency of capital and the excessively high rate of inter-
est entailing a decline in investment. This analysis led him to advocate state intervention
with a view to assuring full employment, through measures encouraging consumption
(leaving the gold standard, increasing private and public investment). The traditional
“microeconomic” vision, based on the interaction between prices and wages, thus had to be
replaced by a “macroeconomic” vision based on relations between aggregates, or overall
quantities, which can be influenced by economic policy, such as the national revenue, total
consumption, the volume of savings and investment. Appointed as deputy governor of the
Bank of England, in 1944 Keynes took part in the Bretton Woods conference which resulted
in the creation of the International Monetary Fund and the World Bank for economic
reconstruction and development.
11. Ludwig Edler von Mises (1881–1973). After studying law at the University of Vienna, he
turned to political economy under the influence of C. Menger and his disciples, F. von
Wieser and E. von Böhm-Bawerk (the “Austrian school”). In 1927 he founded with Hayek
the Österreichisches Institut für Konjunkturforschung in Vienna. Appointed in 1934 to the
University Institute for higher international studies in Geneva, he left for New York in
1940. His main works are: Die Gemeinwirtschaft, untersuchungen über den Sozialismus (Jena:
G. Fischer, 1922); French translation by P. Bastier, A. Terrasse and F. Terrasse, with a pref-
ace by F. Perroux (Paris: Librairie de Médicis, 1938); English translation by J. Kahane,
Socialism: An Economic and Sociological Analysis (London: Cape, 1936), in which he demon-
strates that “in the absence of a market for factors of production these could not be ration-
ally allocated to industrial plants and that, in consequence, a centrally directed economy
could not function” (Michael Polanyi, The Logic of Liberty. Reflections and Rejoinders [London:
Routledge and Kegan Paul, 1951] p. 123) Liberalismus (Jena: G. Fischer, 1927); English trans-
lation, Liberalism: The Classical Tradition (Indianapolis, Ind.: The Liberty Fund, 2005);
Nationalökonomie, Theorie des Handelns und Wirtschaftens ([no place of publication]: Éditions31 January 1979
12.
13.
14.
15.
16.
17.
18.
19.
20.
97
Union, 1940); and Human Action: A treatise on economics (Yale University Press: 1949; third,
revised and corrected edition, Chicago: Contemporary Books, Inc., 1966); French transla-
tion by R. Audouin (Paris: PUF, 1985).
See below, lecture of 7 February 1979, note 24.
On this current of thought, see P.-A. Kunz, L’Expérience néo-libérale allemande dans le contexte
international des idées, doctoral thesis in political science (Lausanne: University of Geneve,
Imprimerie central, 1962), and especially F. Bilger, La Pensée économique libérale de
l’Allemagne contemporaine (Paris: Librairie Générale de Droit, 1964) and J. François-Poncet,
La Politique économique de l’Allemagne ocidentale (Paris: Sirey, 1970), works used extensively
by Foucault, as can be seen from his preparatory notes.
The European Recovery Program proposed in 1947 by the American Secretary of State
G. Marshall, and adopted in 1948 by 16 Western European countries.
The National Council of Resistance (Conseil national de la Résistance, CNR) was formed in
the Spring of 1943 in order to unite the different and politically divided resistance move-
ments. It was presided over by Jean Moulin and then by Georges Bidault. “During their
plenary meeting, all came to an agreement to remain united after Liberation. The
Resistance Charter, which resulted from these deliberations, discussed and approved by
the different groups making up the CNR, contained a bold social and economic program.
Amongst other reforms, it called for ‘a complete plan of social security aiming to guarantee
every citizen the means of existence, when they cannot procure these through work, with
management entrusted to the representatives of the different interests and the state’”
(H.G. Galant, Histoire politique de la sécurité sociale française, 1945–1952 (Paris: Librairie
A. Colin, 1955) p. 24). See below, lecture of 7 March 1979, note 25 on the French plan for
social security in 1945.
Formed on 19 December 1947, one half of this Scientific Council (wissenschaftliche Beirat)
was made up of representatives of the Freiburg School (W. Eucken, F. Böhm, A. Müller,
L. Miksch, A. Lampe, O. Veit, ... ), and the other by representatives of Christian-social
doctrines, such as the Jesuit O. von Nell-Breuning, and socialists, such as K. Schiller,
G. Weisser, H. Peter.
Quoted by F. Bilger, La Pensée économique libérale de l’Allemagne contemporaine, p. 211. See, Der
wissenschaftliche Beirat beim Bundeswirtschaftsministerium (Göttingen: Schwartz, 5 volumes
1950–1961).
Controller General of Finances from 1774 to 1776 under Louis XVI, Turgot, in line with the
doctrine of the économistes and the physiocrats, decreed free trade in grains (decree of
September 1774). See G. Weulersse, La Physiocratie sous le ministère de Turgot et de Necker
(1774–1781) (Poitiers: Impr. de Poitou, 1925; republished Paris: PUF, 1950). See F. Bilger,
La Pensée économique libérale de l’Allemagne contemporaine, p. 215: “( ... ) if Erhard was not a
party man, he was the Turgot of an economic doctrine.”
According to F. Bilger, La Pensée économique libérale, p. 211, the fourteenth plenary meeting
of the Council was held on 21 April and not, as Foucault says, the 28th.
Ludwig Erhard (1897–1977). Assistant and then director of the Institute of Economic
Observation attached to the Nuremberg College of commerce, he steered clear of Nazism
during the Third Reich and devoted himself to economic research. He directed the eco-
nomic administration of the Anglo-American zone from February 1948. As a Christian
Democrat deputy he contributed to a large extent to the adhesion of the CDU (Christlich-
Demokratische-Union) to the principles of the “social market economy.” From 1948, at the
time of the fourteenth plenary meeting of the Council, he traced out the major orientations
of his political future (the primacy of monetary policy and the policy of growth, alignment
of prices on the supply of commodities, equitable and gradual distribution of increasing
material well-being). He was chosen as Minister of the Economy by Adenauer in 1951 and
is considered to be the father of the “German economic miracle (Wirtschaftswunder).”
See J. François-Poncet, La Politique économique de l’Allemagne occidentale, pp. 74–75. On
these neo-liberal councilors, see N. Pietri, L’Allemagne de l’Ouest (1945–1969) (SEDES,
1987) pp. 44–45; D.L. Bark and D.R. Gress, Histoire de l’Allemagne depuis 1945 (Paris:
R. Laffont, 1992) pp. 199–200. See his main work, Wohlstand für alle (Düsseldorf: Econ
Verlag, 1957); French translation by F. Brière with preface by J. Rueff, La prosperité pour tous
(Paris: Plon, 1959), and Deutsche Wirtschaftspolitik, der Weg der sozialen Marktwirtschaft98
21.
22.
23.
24.
25.
26.
27.
28.
t h e b i rt h o f b i o p o l i t i c s
(Frankfurt am Main: Knapp, 1962); French translation by L. Mozère, Une politique de
l’abundance (collection of articles and speeches 1945–1962) (Paris: R. Laffont, 1963);
English translation by Edith Temple Roberts and John B. Wood, Prosperity Through
Competition (London: Thames and Hudson, 1958).
Rede vor der 14. Vollersammlung der Wirtschaftsrates des Vereinigten Wirtschaftsgebietes am 21,
Frankfurt am Main, April 1948. The speech is reproduced in L. Erhard, Deutsche
Wirtschaftspolitik, and in W. Stützel and others, eds., Grundtexte zur Sozialen Marktwirtschaft.
Zeugnisse aus zweihundert Jahren ordnungspolitischer Diskussion (Bonn-Stuttgart-New York:
Ludwigh-Erhard-Stiftung, 1981) pp. 39–42.
Ibid. (Grundtexte) p. 40: “Wenn auch nicht im Ziele völlig einig, so ist doch die Richtung
klar, die wir einzuschlagen haben—die Befreiung von der staatlichen Befehlswirtschaft, die
alle Menschen in das Entwürdigende Joch einer alles Leben überwuchernden Bürokratie
zwingt ( ... ).” See F. Bilger, La Pensée économique libérale, p. 211 (“freedom of the economy
from State controls”).
Ibid.: “Es sind aber weder die Anarchie noch der Termitenstaat als menschliche
Lebensformen geeignet. Nur wo Freiheit und Bindung zum verpflichtenden Gesetz werden,
findet der Staat die sittliche Rechtfertigung, im Namen des Volkes zu sprechen und zu
handeln.” French translation in F. Bilger, La Pensée économique libérale, p. 211: “Neither anar-
chy nor the termite-state are worthy forms of life. Only a state establishing both the free-
dom and responsibility of its citizens can legitimately speak in the name of the people.” It
would be better to translate Termitenstaat as “state of termites,” an expression already used
in 1944 by Wilhelm Röpke in Civitas Humana: Grundfragen der Gesellschafts- und
Wirtschaftsreform (Erlenbach-Zurich: E. Rentsch, 1944); English translation by Cyril
Spencer Fox, Civitas Humana. A Humane Order of Society (London: William Hodge, 1948)
with regard to the “mortal danger” of “Collectivism” p. 2: “this resulting insect State
[Termitenstaat] would not only destroy most institutions and values which comprise a
development of three thousand years and which, with a conscious pride, we designate
Occidental civilisation ... it would take from the life of the individual just that essential
purpose which only freedom can bestow.”
Luigi Einaudi (1874–1961): Professor of political economy at Turin and Milan. His opposi-
tion to fascism and his attachment to liberalism forced him to emigrate to Switzerland
(1943–1944). He was Governor of the Bank of Italy (1945), parliamentary deputy (1946),
and Minister of Finance (1947). He was elected President of the Republic (1948–1955). See
his, Lezioni di politica economica (Turin: G. Einaudi, 1944).
See Max Weber, Die protestantische Ethik und der “Geist” des Kapitalismus (1905), in
Gesammelte Aufsätze zur Religionssociologie (Tübingen: J.C.B. Mohr, 1920) vol. 1, pp. 1–236;
English translation by Stephen Kalberg, The Protestant Ethic and the Spirit of Capitalism
(Oxford: Blackwell, 2002).
See Sécurité, Territoire, Population, lecture of 11 January 1978, p. 17 and p. 27 n. 26; Security,
Territory, Population, p. 15 and p. 26, note 26.
Foucault does not refer to Fichte again in the rest of the lectures. However, with reference
to Zollverein, he mentions him in pages of the manuscript that he did not use which cor-
respond to the end of this lecture (see above, footnote *, p. 00).
24 June 1948, which is actually a decisive turning point in the history of post-war Germany
(Erhard, armed with the authorization of the Economic Council, abolishes all price con-
trols without asking for the prior agreement of the military governments), should be
linked with 18 June, “J day,” which, thanks to monetary reform (creation of the Deutsche
Mark), marks the first stage, and the determinant condition, of this process of transforma-
tion. See D.R. Bark and D.L. Gress, Histoire de l’Allemagne depuis 1945, pp. 191–194;
N. Pietri, L’Allemagne de l’Ouest, pp. 46–48. As Erhard writes in Wohlstand für alle, p. 21;
Prosperity Through Competition, p. 12: “The big chance for Germany came in 1948: it
depended on linking the currency reform with an equally resolute economic reform.” The
law of 24 June 1948 bears the name, moreover, of “law on the principles of management and
prices policy after monetary reform.” See G. Schneilin and H. Schumacher, Économie de
l’Allemagne depuis 1945 (Paris: A. Colin, 1992) p. 24; J. François-Poncet, La Politique
économique, pp. 71–73. This point is all the more important as monetary stability represents,
after the fundamental principle (“realization of a system of prices of perfect competition”),31 January 1979
29.
30.
31.
32.
33.
34.
35.
36.
37.
38.
39.
40.
99
the major principle of the neo-liberal program. See below, lecture of 14 February 1979,
pp. 138–139.
Churchill, beaten in the 1945 election, was replaced by C.R. Attlee, leader of the Labour
Party since 1935. His government (1945–1951) was marked by a strong state hold on the
economy (nationalizations, austerity plan, social security).
On the general strike, see Erhard, Wohlstand für alle, pp. 24–32; Prosperity Through
Competition, pp. 15–22.
Oswald von Nell-Breuning (1890–1991), s.j., was a member of the Scientific Council in
the ministry for the Economy from 1948 to 1965. He was a theoretician of a “genuinely
Christian socialism,” based on the social encyclicals of Popes Leo XIII and Pious XI. He
was the drafter of the encyclical Quadragesimo Anno (15 May 1931): see O. von Nell-
Breuning, Die soziale Enzyklika. Erläuterungen zum Weltrundschreiben Papst Pius’ XI. über die
gesellschaftsordnung (Cologne: Hermann, 1932); he published Gesellschaftsordnung. Wesensbild
und Ordnungsbild der menschlichen Gesellschaft (Nuremberg-Bamberg-Passau: Glock & Lutz,
1947) and, with H. Sacher, Beiträge zu einem Wörterbuch der Politik, Heft 2: Zur christlichen
Staatslehre (Fribourg-en-Brisgau: Herder, 1948), as well as several articles (on wage justice,
the concept of the proletariat, etcetera) extending the teaching of the encyclical
Quadragesimo Anno. “( ... ) Convinced of the intrinsic justice of socialism, [he] asserted that
modern man could only lead a satisfying life if he participated in the management of his
enterprise, which did not mean only co-management but, in the short term, labor union
control of all private industry” (D.J. Bark and D.R. Gress, Histoire d’Allemagne, p. 145); see
F. Bilger, La Pensée économique liberale, pp. 248–253 (on the combination of competition and
corporative organization recommended by Nell-Breuning). His, very relative, “rallying” to
the neo-liberal program is expressed in particular in the article “Neoliberalismus und
katholische Soziallehre,” in P.M. Boarman, ed., Der Christ und die soziale Marktwirtschaft
(Stuttgart-Cologne: Kohlhammer, 1955) pp. 101–122.
It is not at Munich, but at the Johann-Wolfgang-Goethe-Universität in Frankfurt that
Oswald von Nell-Breuning takes on various teaching responsibilities from 1948.
Theodor Blank (1905–1972), CDU deputy, and Catholic union leader. On 26 October
1950, Adenauer entrusted him with the direction of what would become the Ministry of
Defense, with the title “general councilor of the federal chancellor responsible for matters
concerning the increase of allied forces.”
See F. Bilger, La Pensée économique libérale, p. 211: “Christian trade unionist, vice president
of the miners’ union, he became acquainted with the works of the Freiburg School and
accepted that the liberal order was a valid alternative to capitalism and economic planning,
both of which he rejected.”
9–11 May 1946, the first Congress of the SPD (Sozialdemokratische Partei Deutschlands).
Schumacher was confirmed as president.
See the texts quoted by F. Bilger, La Pensée libérale, p. 271.
Karl Schiller (1911–1994), professor of economics at the University of Hamburg, was an
SPD member of the Hamburg parliament (1949–1957), rector of his university
(1958–1959), then senator responsible for the economy in West Berlin (1961–1965),
deputy in the Bundestag (1965–1972), and federal minister of the Economy (see the fol-
lowing note). From 1947 he was a member of the Scientific Council of economic adminis-
tration brought together by Erhard.
In the government of the “grand coalition” bringing together the CDU/CSU and the SPD,
formed by the Christian Democrat Kiesinger in December 1966. He exercised this func-
tion until 1972 (combining the portfolios of the Economy and Finance from 1971 to 1972).
On his economic policy, see D.L. Bark and D.R. Gress, Histoire de l’Allemagne, pp. 584–586.
K. Schiller, Sozialismus und Wettbewerb (Hamburg: Verlagsges. deutscher Konsum-
genossenschaften, 1955).
D.L. Bark and D.R. Gress, Histoire d’Allemagne, pp. 428–429: “In 1953 he forged an expres-
sion with regard to the social market economy defining the alterations that the social
democrats could bring to it: ‘As much competition as possible, as much planning as neces-
sary.’ See H. Körner and others, Wirtschaftspolitik, Wissenschaft und politische Aufgabe (Bern:
Paul Haupt, 1976) p. 86.” He formulated the famous slogan during a session of the SPD
on economic policy that took place at Bochum in February 1953. The formula was taken up100
41.
42.
43.
44.
45.
46.
47.
48.
49.
50.
51.
52.
53.
t h e b i rt h o f b i o p o l i t i c s
again in the program of the SPD in 1959 (see the following note; D.L. Bark and
D.R. Gress, ibid. p. 430). See F. Bilger, La Pensée économique libérale, the Preface by
D. Villey, p. xiv, and pp. 257–258.
Meeting at an extraordinary congress from the 13 to 15 November 1959 at Bad Godesberg,
by a majority of 324 to 16 the SPD adopted the “basic program” (Grundsatzprogram) which,
breaking with the Marxist inspired Heidelberg program of 1925, marked a decisive turn-
ing point in the party’s line.
“Private ownership of the means of production deserves protection and encouragement
insofar as it is not an obstacle to an equitable social order. Small and medium enterprises
deserve to be consolidated so that they can assert themselves against big enterprises on the
economic plane” (Basic program of the German Social Democratic Party, quoted by D.L. Bark
and D.R. Gress, Histoire de l’Allemagne, p. 430. See F. Bilger, La Pensée économique libérale,
p. 273, which refers here to the article by W. Kreiterling, “La social-démocratie révise sa
doctrine,” Documents. Revue des questions allemandes, 1959, p. 652 sq.
“A totalitarian or dictatorial economy destroys freedom. That is why the German Social
Democratic Party approves a free market economy wherever competition exists. However,
where the markets are dominated by individuals or groups, measures must be taken to pre-
serve the freedom of the economy. Competition as much as possible—planning as much as
necessary” (Basic program, quoted by D.L. Bark and D.R. Gress, Histoire de l’Allemagne,
p. 430). See F. Bilger, La Pensée économique libérale, p. 273.
Kurt Schumacher (1895–1952) was deputy in the Reichstag between 1930 and 1933 and
president of the SPD from 1932 until the prohibition of the party a year later. He spent ten
years in a concentration camp under the Nazis. From 1945 he re-established the headquar-
ters of the revived SPD, declaring: “Either we succeed in making Germany a socialist coun-
try in the economic domain and democratic in the political domain, or we will cease being
a German people” (quoted by D.L. Bark and D.R. Gress, Histoire de l’Allemagne, p. 188).
See F. Bilger, La Pensée économique libérale, p. 275: “At the end of 1961, Professor Schiller was
called by Willy Brandt to take up the office of ‘Wirtschaftssenator’ [economic senator, i.e.,
Minister of Economic Affairs] in West Berlin and it is generally thought that he will
become Minister of Economic Affairs in an eventual socialist federal government. In his
new functions, Schiller systematically applied a liberal policy and one of his last speeches
in an ‘economics’ session of the SPD at Essen in October 1963 provoked a real sensation
throughout Germany with the extremely clear affirmation of his adherence to the market
economy and the categorical rejection of even flexible planning.”
Karl Herbert Frahm Brandt, known as Willy Brandt (1913–1992). SPD deputy in the
Bundestag from 1950 to 1957, and then Mayor of West Berlin from 1957 to 1966, in 1966
he became Minister of Foreign Affairs in the coalition government of Kiesinger and was
elected Chancellor in 1969.
Thomas Hobbes (1588–1679), Leviathan (London: A. Crooke, 1651).
John Locke (1632–1704), Two Treatises of Government, written around 1680–1683, they were
published in 1690 (London: A. Churchill).
See L. von Mises, Die Gemeinswirtschaft, Untersuchungen über den Sozialismus; Socialism: An
Economic and Sociological Analysis.
See Sécurité, Territoire, Population; Security, Territory, Population, lectures of 29 March and
April 1978.
See above, lecture of 10 January 1979, note 18.
Erich Honecker (1912–1994), named First Secretary in 1971 after the retirement of Walter
Ulbricht.
In continuity with these analyses, in 1983 Foucault conceived of a project of a report on
socialist politics: “Do the socialists have a problematic of government, or do they only have
a problematic of the state” (quoted by Daniel Defert, “Chronologie,” Dits et Écrits, 1,
p. 62). Apart from some reading by Foucault at this time (Jaurés, Blum, Mitterand), it
seems that this project did not get beyond a dossier of press cuttings.five
7 February 1979
German neo-liberalism (II). ⵑ Its problem: how can economic
freedom both found and limit the state at the same time? ⵑ The
neo-liberal theorists: W. Eucken, F. Böhm, A. Müller-Armack,
F. von Hayek. ⵑ Max Weber and the problem of the irrational
rationality of capitalism. The answers of the Frankfurt School and
the Freiburg School. ⵑ Nazism as necessary field of adversity to
the definition of the neo-liberal objective. ⵑ The obstacles to
liberal policy in Germany since the nineteenth century: (a) the
protectionist economy according to List; (b) Bismarck’s state
socialism; (c) the setting up of a planned economy during the First
World War; (d) Keynesian interventionism; (e) the economic
policy of National Socialism. ⵑ The neo-liberal critique of
National Socialism on the basis of these different elements of
German history. ⵑ Theoretical consequences: extension of this
critique to the New Deal and to the Beveridge plans;
interventionism and the growth of the power of the state;
massification and uniformization, effects of state control. ⵑ The
stake of neo-liberalism: its novelty in comparison with classical
liberalism. The theory of pure competition.
[ ]
TODAY I WOULD LIKE to try to finish what I began to say about
post-war German neo-liberalism, that is to say, the contemporary
neo-liberalism which actually involves us.102
t h e b i rt h o f b i o p o l i t i c s
I have tried to show you the problem which the question of the mar-
ket raised for the eighteenth century. The problem was how, within a
given state whose legitimacy could not be questioned, could you allow
for a market freedom which was both historically and juridically new
insofar as in the eighteenth century kind of police state freedom was
almost only ever defined as the freedom of privilege, as a reserved free-
dom, as freedom linked to status, profession, or a concession of power,
and so on? How was freedom of the market, as the freedom of laissez-
faire, possible within a police state? This was the problem, and the
answer given by the eighteenth century was ultimately simple and con-
sisted in saying that what will give a place to market freedom and allow
its insertion within raison d’État and the police state is quite simply that
left to itself and governed by laissez-faire the market will be a source of
the state’s enrichment, growth, and therefore power. The answer of the
eighteenth century was, in sum, that you will move towards more state
by less government.
The problem posed to Germany in 1945, or more precisely in 1948 if
we take those texts and decisions I talked about last week as our refer-
ence point, was clearly a very different and opposite problem (this is
what I tried to explain last week). The problem was: given a state that
does not exist, if I can put it like that, and given the task of giving exis-
tence to a state, how can you legitimize this state in advance as it were?
How can you make it acceptable on the basis of an economic freedom
which will both ensure its limitation and enable it to exist at the same
time? This was the problem, the question that I tried to outline last
week and which constitutes, if you like, the historically and politically
first objective of neo-liberalism. I would now like to try to examine the
answer more closely. How can economic freedom be the state’s founda-
tion and limitation at the same time, its guarantee and security? Clearly,
this calls for the re-elaboration of some of the basic elements of liberal
doctrine—not so much in the economic theory of liberalism as in liber-
alism as an art of government or, if you like, as a doctrine of government.
I will break a bit from my habits and give a few biographical details
about these people who were grouped around the future Chancellor
Erhard and who programmed this new economic policy, this new way of
connecting the economy and politics that is a characteristic feature of the7 February 1979
103
present German Federal Republic. Who were these people? In the sci-
entific commission I have talked about, and which was brought together
by Erhard in 1948, there were a number of people, among the main ones
being, first of all, Walter Eucken, 1 a professional economist who at the
start of the century was a student of Alfred Weber, the brother of Max
Weber. Eucken was appointed professor of political economy at Freiburg
in 1927 where he met Husserl, 2 encountered phenomenology, and met a
number of the jurists who were eventually so important in the theory of
law in twentieth century Germany, who themselves came into contact
with phenomenology and who tried to re-elaborate a theory of law that
tried to avoid both the constraints of nineteenth century historicism
and Kelsen’s formalist, axiomatic, statist conception. 3 In 1930, 1933, I
am not sure of the date, Eucken wrote an article, which caused a big stir
at the time, against the possible application of Keynesian methods to
resolve the crisis in Germany. 4 These methods were being advocated at
the time by people like Lautenbach 5 and Doctor Schacht. 6 Eucken
remained silent during the Nazi period. 7 He was still professor at
Freiburg. In 1936 he founded a journal with the name Ordo 8 and in
1940 published a book with the somewhat paradoxical title of
Grundlagen der Nationalökonomie, 9 which in reality is not about national
economy but precisely something which doctrinally and politically is
fundamentally opposed to national economy. It was Eucken who formed
the school of economists called the Freiburg School or the “ordoliberals”
around the journal Ordo which he directed. He, then, was one of the sci-
entific advisors, no doubt the main one, brought together by Erhard 10 in
1948. So, there was Eucken, and there was also Franz Böhm, 11 who was
one of the jurists at Freiburg, a phenomenologist by training, or at least
a disciple of Husserl, up to a point. Franz Böhm later became a deputy
in the Bundestag and in the seventies he had a decisive influence on
German economic policy. There was also Müller-Armack 12 in the com-
mission, who was an economic historian, I think a professor at
Freiburg, 13 but I am not absolutely sure, and who in 1941 wrote a very
interesting book with the curious title of Genealogy of Economic Style 14 in
which, outside of pure economic theory and outside of pure economic
policy, he tries to define something that in a way would be an art of eco-
nomic government, of governing economically, which he calls economic104
t h e b i rt h o f b i o p o l i t i c s
style. 15 Müller-Armack became Ludwig Erhard’s Secretary of State when
the latter was Minister for the Economy and was one of the negotiators
of the Rome Treaty. These, along with others, are some of the characters
of this scientific commission.
Behind these, we should also refer to some other people who also
[played an important role in]* this new definition of liberalism, of the
liberal art of government. They were not members of the scientific com-
mission, but some of them at least were people who inspired it, the main
one being obviously Wilhelm Röpke, 16 an economist in the Weimar
period. He was one of Schleicher’s 17 counselors and [should have become]
one of his ministers if Schleicher had not been dismissed in favor of Hitler
at the start of 1933. Röpke was also an anti-Keynesian and was forced into
exile in 1933. He went to Istanbul 18 and then settled in Geneva 19 where he
remained until the end of his career. In 1950 he published a little book
entitled The Orientation of German Economic Policy, 20 with a preface by
Adenauer, which in a way represents the clearest, simplest, and most clear-
cut manifesto for this new economic policy. Others should be added. With
regard to Röpke, I should add that during and just after the war he wrote
a kind of great trilogy which, together with the Grundlagen der
Nationalökonomie, is a kind of bible of this neo-liberalism. It is a work in
three volumes, the first of which bears the title of Gesellschaftskrisis (The
Crisis of Society), 21 a term whose sad fate in contemporary political vocab-
ulary you are familiar with, and which explicitly refers of course to
Husserl’s The Crisis of European Sciences. 22 There was also Rüstow. 23 There
was someone who is clearly very important who also was not a member of
the scientific commission, but whose career and trajectory was ultimately
very important for the definition of contemporary neo-liberalism. This is
the Austrian von Hayek. 24 He came from Austria and from neo-liberalism;
he emigrated at the time of, or just before, the Anschluss. He went to
England and also to the United States. He was very clearly one of the
inspirations of contemporary American liberalism, or of American
anarcho-capitalism if you like, and he returned to Germany in 1962 where
he was appointed professor at Freiburg, thus closing the circle.
* M.F.: had a direct importance on7 February 1979
105
I have mentioned these small biographical details for a number of
reasons. The first is that it is clear that those in Germany in 1948 who
grappled with and tried to resolve the problem of how to link together
the legitimacy of a state and the freedom of economic partners, while
accepting that the second must found the first, or serve as its guarantee,
had already been dealing with this problem for a long time. The prob-
lem had already arisen within and at the time of the Weimar Republic, 25
whose state legitimacy was constantly challenged and which had to
struggle with well-known economic problems, and in the years between
1925 and 1930 people like Eucken, Böhm, and Röpke had to struggle
with this problem.
I have also given some biographical reference points to show you
something which may be worth studying more closely (for those who
are interested in contemporary Germany). This is the curious closeness
and parallels between what we call the Freiburg School or ordoliberals
and their neighbors, as it were, the Frankfurt School. There is a parallel
in the dates and equally in their fate, since part at least of the Freiburg
School, like the Frankfurt School, was dispersed and forced into exile.
There is the same type of political experience and also the same starting
point, since broadly speaking both schools started from a problematic,
I was going to say a political-university problematic, which was domi-
nant in Germany at the start of the twentieth century and which we can
call Weberianism. What I mean is that Max Weber 26 was a starting point
for both schools and we could say, to schematize drastically, that he
functioned in early twentieth century Germany as the person who,
broadly speaking, displaced Marx’s problem. 27 If Marx tried to define
and analyze what could be summed up as the contradictory logic of cap-
ital, Max Weber’s problem, and the problem he introduced into
German sociological, economic, and political reflection at the same time,
is not so much the contradictory logic of capital as the problem of the
irrational rationality of capitalist society. I think, again very schemati-
cally, that what characterizes Max Weber’s problem is this movement
from capital to capitalism, from the logic of contradiction to the division
between the rational and the irrational. And we can say roughly that the
Frankfurt School as well as the Freiburg School, Horkheimer 28 as well
as Eucken, have simply taken up this problem in two different senses, in106
t h e b i rt h o f b i o p o l i t i c s
two different directions. Again schematically, the problem for the
Frankfurt School was to determine what new social rationality could be
defined and formed in such a way as to nullify economic irrationality.
The decipherment of this irrational rationality of capitalism was also the
problem for the Freiburg School, but people like Eucken, Röpke, and
others try to resolve it in a different way, not by rediscovering, invent-
ing, or defining the new form of social rationality, but by defining, or
redefining, or rediscovering, the economic rationality that will make it
possible to nullify the social irrationality of capitalism. So, there were
two opposed ways, if you like, for solving the same problem. Rationality
or irrationality of capitalism, I don’t know. The result anyway was, as
you know, that both returned from exile to Germany in 1945, 1947—
I am, of course, talking about those who were forced into exile—and
history had it that in 1968 the last disciples of the Frankfurt School
clashed with the police of a government inspired by the Freiburg School,
thus finding themselves on opposite sides of the barricades, for such was
the double, parallel, crossed, and antagonistic fate of Weberianism in
Germany.
I have mentioned the career details of these people who inspired the
programming of neo-liberal politics in Germany for a third, clearly more
important reason, which is that the experience of Nazism was at the
very heart of their reflections. But I think we can say that Nazism was,
in a way, the epistemological and political “road to Damascus”* for the
Freiburg School. That is to say, Nazism enabled them to define what I
would call the field of adversity that they had to define and cross in
order to reach their objective. Putting forward a merely strategic analy-
sis, that is to say, not an exhaustive analysis of their discourse, I would
say that basically they had to do three things.
First, they had to define an objective. This objective, which we ana-
lyzed last week, 29 was to found the legitimacy of a state on the basis of a
space of freedom for the economic partners. This is the objective. It was
the objective in 1948. It was basically already the objective around the
years 1925–1930, although it was less urgent, less clear, and less clear-cut.
* In inverted commas in the manuscript.7 February 1979
107
Second, they had to define not just the set of adversaries they could
come up against in achieving this objective, but, fundamentally, the gen-
eral system with which this objective and the pursuit of this objective
could clash, that is to say, the whole set of obstacles and enemies which
broadly speaking constitutes the field of adversity with which they had
to deal.
And the third operation they had to carry out to cross this field of
adversity and achieve their objective was, of course, the distribution or
redistribution of the conceptual or technical resources available to them.
I would like to develop the last two points of this “strategic”* analysis a
little today.
How did they constitute their field of adversity? That is to say, how
did they find the overall logic of the set of enemy obstacles or adversaries
with which they had to deal? I think the experience of Nazism was very
important here. Of course, German liberal thought, although relatively
subdued, was not born with the Freiburg School. For many years there
were people, like Lujo Brentano 30 for example, who tried to support and
maintain the classical themes of liberalism in a climate that was clearly
not very favorable. Very schematically, we can say that from practically
the middle of the nineteenth century there were a number of major
obstacles to and criticisms of liberalism and liberal politics in Germany,
appearing successively on the historical scene. Again, this is very
schematic.
First, there was the principle, practically formulated in 1840 by
List, 31 that, in Germany at least, national policy and a liberal economy
could not be compatible. The failure of the Zollverein 32 to constitute a
German state on the basis of an economic liberalism was in a way the
proof of this. List and his successors laid down the principle that far
from being the general formula universally applicable to any economic
policy, liberal economics could only ever be, and was in fact only ever a
tactical instrument or strategy for some countries to obtain an econom-
ically hegemonic and politically imperialist position over the rest of the
world. In clear and simple terms, liberalism is not the general form
* M.F. notes: in inverted commas108
t h e b i rt h o f b i o p o l i t i c s
which every economic policy must adopt. Quite simply, liberalism is
English policy; it is the policy of English domination. As a general rule
it is also the policy suited to a maritime nation. To that extent,
Germany, with its history, with its geographical position, with the
whole set of constraints in which it is held, cannot afford a liberal eco-
nomic policy; it needs a protectionist economic policy.
The second, both theoretical and political obstacle that German lib-
eralism encountered at the end of the nineteenth century, was
Bismarckian state socialism: for a unified German nation to exist, it
must not only be protected against the outside by a protectionist policy,
in addition, internally, everything that could compromise national unity
must be brought under control, suppressed, and generally speaking the
proletariat, as a threat to the unity of the nation and state, must be effec-
tively reintegrated within a social and political consensus. This is
roughly the theme of Bismarckian state socialism, the second obstacle to
a liberal politics.
The third obstacle, starting with the war, was obviously the develop-
ment of a planned economy, that is to say, the technique which Germany
was forced to adopt by its wartime situation and which [consisted in]
the organization of a centralized economy under an administrative appa-
ratus which took the most important decisions in the economic order—
allocating scarce resources, fixing prices, and guaranteeing full
employment. Germany did not abandon the planned economy at the
end of the war, since planning was then renewed by both socialist and
non-socialist governments. Practically from Rathenau 33 until 1933
Germany had an economy in which planning and economic centraliza-
tion was a recurrent, if not a constant form.
Finally, the fourth obstacle, which arrived later on the scene in
Germany, was Keynesian-style interventionism. From 1925 more or less
[ ... *] in 1930, German Keynesians, like Lautenbach 34 for example,
make the same kind of criticisms of liberalism as Keynesians in general,
and they propose a number of state interventions on the general bal-
ances of the economy. So, from before the Nazi seizure of power, we have
* One or two inaudible words.7 February 1979
109
four elements: a protected economy, state socialism, economic planning,
and Keynesian interventionism. These four elements acted as barriers to
a liberal policy and from the end of the nineteenth century they were the
object of a series of discussions conducted by the few partisans of liber-
alism living in Germany. In a way the German neo-liberals will be the
heirs of this dispersed heritage, of this series of discussions.
I know I am giving a caricature of the situation and that in actual fact
there was no discontinuity between these different elements but rather
a sort of continuous transition, a sort of continuous network. The move-
ment from economic protectionism to the economy of state aid was
quite natural. Rathenau type planning, for example, was more or less
re-utilized in a Keynesian perspective at the end of the 1920s and in the
1930s. All of this was connected, of course, but it did not form a system.
Now what Nazism finally contributed was the strict coalescence of
these different elements, that is to say, the organization of an economic
system in which protectionist economics, the economics of state aid, the
planned economy, and Keynesian economics formed a firmly secured
whole in which the different parts were bound together by the economic
administration that was set up. The Keynesian policy of Doctor Schact 35
was taken over in 1936* by the four-year plan for which Göring was
responsible 36 and for which, moreover, he was surrounded by some of
Rathenau’s counselors. 37 Planning had a double objective: on the one
hand, to ensure the economic autarchy of Germany, that is to say, an
absolute protectionism, and, on the other, a policy of state aid, all, of
course, entailing inflationary effects that war preparations (this was, if
you like, a militarized economy) enabled to be financed. All this formed
a whole.
I would say that, faced with the Nazi system, the theoretical, specu-
lative coup de force of the German neo-liberals was not to say, as most
people did at the time, and especially the Keynesians: The economic
system the Nazis are setting up is a monstrosity. They are combining
elements that are actually heterogeneous, which constrict the German
economy within an armature of mutually contradictory and disparate
* M.F.: 1934110
t h e b i rt h o f b i o p o l i t i c s
elements. The coup de force of the ordoliberals was not to say: Nazism is
the product of an extreme state of crisis, the final point towards which
an economy and a politics unable to overcome their contradictions are
carried, and Nazism as the extreme solution cannot serve as an analyti-
cal model for general history, or at any rate for the past history of
capitalism* in Europe. The ordoliberals refuse to see Nazism as this
monstrosity, this economic hotchpotch, this solution of the last resort at
the final point of crisis. They say: Nazism is a truth. Or rather, they say:
Nazism is the revelation of the necessary system of relations between
these different elements. The neo-liberals say: Take any of these ele-
ments, a protected economy or Keynesian-type intervention. These are,
of course, apparently different things, but you will never be able to
develop one without arriving, in one way or another, at the other. That
is to say, the neo-liberals say that these four elements which German
economic and political history successively brought onto the scene of
governmental action are economically linked to each other and if you
adopt one of them you will not escape the other three.
Taking up this schema and principle they successively study different
types of economy, like Soviet planning for example. Those, like Hayek,
who had a good knowledge of the United States took the example of the
New Deal, and others took up the English example and, in particular,
the examples of Keynesian policy in the big Beveridge programs worked
out during the war. 38 They took all this and said: You can see anyway
that, first, these are the same principles at work and, second, each of
these elements will attract the other three. It was in this way that, in
1943 or 1944, I no longer remember, Röpke published, not without
boldness and nerve, an analysis of the Beveridge plan which had been
worked out during the war, and he said to the English: What you are
preparing for yourselves with your Beveridge plan is quite simply
Nazism. On one side you battle with the Germans militarily, but eco-
nomically, and so politically, you are in the process of repeating their
lessons. English Labour party socialism will lead you to German-style
Nazism. The Beveridge plan will lead you to the Göring plan, to the
* Foucault adds: and of its history7 February 1979
111
four-year plan of 1936. 39 Consequently they tried to pinpoint a sort of
economic-political invariant that could be found in political regimes as
different as Nazism and parliamentary England, the Soviet Union and
America of the New Deal. They tried to identify this relational invari-
ant in these different regimes and they laid down the principle that the
important difference was no longer between this or that constitutional
structure. The real problem was between a liberal politics and any other
form whatsoever of economic interventionism, whether it takes the rel-
atively mild form of Keynesianism or the drastic form of an autarchic
plan like that of Germany. So we have an invariant that could be called,
if you like, the anti-liberal invariant, which possesses its own logic and
internal necessity. This was what the ordoliberals deciphered in the
experience of Nazism.
The second lesson they drew from Nazism was the following. What,
they said, is Nazism? Essentially and above all it is the unlimited
growth of state power. To tell the truth, this claim, which now seems to
us a commonplace, presented a paradox and also represented a theoret-
ical or analytical coup de force, for when we look at how National Socialist
Germany functioned, I think the least we can say is that, at first sight at
least, Nazism was the first systematic attempt to initiate the withering
away of the state. Nazism is the withering away of the state for a num-
ber of reasons. First, this appears in the very juridical structure of
National Socialist Germany, since as you know in National Socialist
Germany the state lost the status of juridical personality inasmuch as
the state could only be defined in law as the instrument of something
else which was the true foundation of right, namely the people, the Volk. 40
The Volk in its community organization, the people as Gemeinschaft, is at
once the principle of right and the objective behind every organization,
behind every juridical institution, the state included. The state may well
express the Volk, it may well express the Gemeinschaft, and it may well be
the form in which the Gemeinschaft both manifests itself and produces its
actions, but the state will be nothing more than this form, or rather,
than this instrument.
Second, in Nazism the state is, as it were, disqualified from within,
since the principle of the internal operation of all the apparatuses was
not an administrative kind of hierarchy with the game of authority and112
t h e b i rt h o f b i o p o l i t i c s
responsibility typical of European administrations since the nineteenth
century. It was the principle of the Fühertum, the principle of
conduction,* to which loyalty and obedience had to correspond, which
means that in the form of the state’s structure nothing must be pre-
served of the vertical communication, from below to above and from
above to below, between the different elements of this Gemeinschaft, of
the Volk.
Finally, third, the existence of the party and the whole legislative sys-
tem which governed relations between the administrative apparatus and
the party vested essential authority in the party at the expense of the
state. The subordinate position of the state is clearly marked by its sys-
tematic destruction, or at any rate, its reduction to the pure and simple
instrument of the community of the people, which was the Führer prin-
ciple, which was the existence of the party.
Deciphering this situation, the ordoliberals reply: Don’t be deceived.
The state is apparently disappearing; it has apparently been subordi-
nated and renounced. Nonetheless it remains the case that if the state is
subordinated in this way, it is quite simply because the traditional forms
of the nineteenth century state cannot stand up to this new demand for
state control that the economic policy of the Third Reich calls for. In
fact, if you adopt the economic system I have been talking about, then
you will need a sort of super-state to make it work, a supplement to the
state which the present organizational and institutional forms we are
familiar with cannot assure. Hence the necessity, precisely, for this new
state to extend beyond itself in comparison with the forms we know and
its need to create these sorts of supplements of the state, these intensi-
fiers of state power represented by the theme of the Gemeinschaft, by the
principle of obedience to the Führer, and by the existence of the party.
So, everything presented by the Nazis as the destruction of the bourgeois
and capitalist state are in fact supplements of the state, a state in the
process of being born, institutions undergoing statification (étatisation).
A consequence of this, and what enables the ordoliberals to draw a dif-
ferent conclusion, is that there is in fact a necessary link between this
* Foucault first used this term in relation to the practice of conducting conduct in the 1978
lectures, Security, Territory, Population. See the lecture of 1 March 1978; G.B.7 February 1979
113
economic organization and this growth of the state, which means that
none of these elements of the economic system can be adopted without
the other three arriving gradually in its wake, and to be established and
to work, each of these elements calls precisely for the growth of state
power. The economic invariant, on the one hand, and, on the other, the
growth of the power of the state, even in apparently aberrant forms in
comparison with the classical state, are absolutely bound up with each
other.
Finally, the third coup de force that Nazism allowed the neo-liberals to
carry out with regard to the problem they wanted to resolve is the fol-
lowing. The Nazi analysis of capitalist, bourgeois, utilitarian, and indi-
vidualistic society can be traced back to Sombart, 41 insofar as it was
expressed and epitomized by Sombart in his trajectory between 1900
and 1930 from quasi-Marxism to quasi-Nazism. The best summary is
in his book Der deutsche Sozialismus. 42 What have the bourgeois and cap-
italist economy and state produced? They have produced a society in
which individuals have been torn from their natural community and
brought together in the flat, anonymous form of the mass. Capitalism
produces the mass. Capitalism consequently produces what Sombart
does not exactly call one-dimensionality, 43 but this is precisely what he
defines. Capitalism and bourgeois society have deprived individuals of
direct and immediate communication with each other and they are
forced to communicate through the intermediary of a centralized admin-
istrative apparatus. [They have] therefore reduced individuals to the
state of atoms subject to an abstract authority in which they do not rec-
ognize themselves. Capitalist society has also forced individuals into a
type of mass consumption with the functions of standardization and
normalization. Finally, this bourgeois and capitalist economy has
doomed individuals to communicate with each other only through the
play of signs and spectacles.* 44 In Sombart, and in fact already from
around 1900, 45 we find that well-known critique which has now
become one of the commonplaces of a thought whose articulation and
framework we do not know very well: the critique of mass society, of the
* Manuscript: “of the spectacle.”114
t h e b i rt h o f b i o p o l i t i c s
society of one-dimensional man, of authority, of consumption, of the
spectacle, 46 and so forth. That is what Sombart said. What’s more, it is
what the Nazis took up in their own way. And it was indeed in opposi-
tion to this destruction of society by the [capitalist]* economy and state
that the Nazis proposed to do what they wished to do.
But, say the neo-liberals, what do the Nazis actually do with their
organization, their party, and their principle of the Führertum? In reality
all they do is intensify this mass society, this society of standardizing
and normalizing consumption, this society of signs and spectacles. Look
at Nazi society as it actually functions. We are dealing entirely with the
order of the mass, the masses at Nuremberg, the Nuremberg spectacles,
standard consumption for everyone, the idea of the Volkswagen, and so
on. All of this is only the renewal and intensification of all those features
of bourgeois capitalist society that Sombart had denounced and which
the Nazis claimed to be rejecting. And why is this? Why do they only
renew what they claim to denounce if not because all these elements are
not the effect and product of capitalist society as Sombart claimed and
as the Nazis claim after him? Rather, they are the product and effect of
a society that economically does not accept liberalism, of a society, or
rather of a state, that has chosen a policy of protectionism and planning
in which the market does not perform its function and in which the
state or para-state administration takes responsibility for the everyday
life of individuals. These mass phenomena of standardization and the
spectacle are linked to statism, to anti-liberalism, and not to a market
economy.
To summarize all this, the decisive point of the Nazi experience for
the Freiburg liberals—and this was their choice of adversary, if you like,
the way in which they set up the field of adversity necessary for the
definition of their strategy—was that, first, they thought they could
establish that Nazism was the product of an economic invariant which
is indifferent and as it were impervious to the capitalism/socialism
opposition and to the constitutional organization of states; second, they
thought they could establish National Socialism as an invariant which,
* M.F.: socialist7 February 1979
115
as both cause and effect, was absolutely bound up with the unlimited
growth of state power; and third, that the first major and visible effect
of this invariant linked to the growth of the state was a destruction of
the network, the tissue of the social community, a destruction which,
through a sort of chain reaction, a loop, calls precisely for protectionism,
a centrally planned economy, and an increase in the power of the state.
Broadly speaking, everything which opposes liberalism and proposes
state management of the economy thus constitutes an invariant whose
history can be seen throughout the development of European societies
since the end of the nineteenth century and, more precisely, from the
start of the twentieth century, that is to say, when the liberal art of gov-
ernment became, so to speak, intimidated by its own consequences and
tried to limit the consequences that it ought to have drawn itself from its
own development. How did it try to limit them? Well, by a technique of
intervention which consisted in applying to society and the economy a
type of rationality considered valid within the natural sciences. In short,
what we can broadly call technology. Technicization of state manage-
ment, of control of the economy, and also in the analysis of economic
phenomena, is what the ordoliberals call “eternal Saint-Simonism,” 47
and they identify Saint-Simon 48 with the birth of that vertigo which
takes hold of the liberal art of government and leads it to seek a princi-
ple of limitation, a principle of organization in the application to soci-
ety of a schema of rationality specific to nature, a principle which
ultimately leads to Nazism. So, from Saint-Simon to Nazism there is a
cycle of rationality entailing interventions which entail the growth of
the state, which entails setting up an administration that itself functions
according to technical types of rationality, and this constitutes precisely
the genesis of Nazism over two centuries, or at any rate a century and a
half, of the history of capitalism.
Making this type of analysis—of course, I am oversimplifying every-
thing they said between 1935 and 1940 or 1950—in putting forward this
analysis at the borders of political reflection, economic analysis, and soci-
ology, the ordoliberals launched a fine scathing attack, since a familiar
type of discourse and analysis takes off through this kind of analysis: the
traditional critiques of bourgeois society and the analysis of bureaucracy;
the idea of Nazism we all have in our heads, the theme of Nazism as the116
t h e b i rt h o f b i o p o l i t i c s
revelation and final point of an in some way historically natural develop-
ment of capitalism; the negative theology of the state as the absolute evil;
the possibility of sweeping up events in the Soviet Union and the USA,
concentration camps and social security records, into the same critique,
and so on. You are familiar with all of this, and I think it originates in
this series of theoretical and analytical coups de force of ordoliberalism.
But with regard to what I would like to say, this is not for me the
most important thing. The essential thing is the conclusion the ordolib-
erals drew from this series of analyses, namely: since Nazism shows that
the defects and destructive effects traditionally attributed to the market
economy should instead be attributed to the state and its intrinsic
defects and specific rationality, then the analyses must be completely
overturned. Our question should not be: Given a relatively free market
economy, how should the state limit it so as to minimize its harmful
effects? We should reason completely differently and say: Nothing
proves that the market economy is intrinsically defective since every-
thing attributed to it as a defect and as the effect of its defectiveness
should really be attributed to the state. So, let’s do the opposite and
demand even more from the market economy than was demanded from
it in the eighteenth century. In the eighteenth century the market was
called upon to say to the state: Beyond such and such a limit, regarding
such and such a question, and starting at the borders of such and such a
domain, you will no longer intervene. This is not enough, the ordoliber-
als say. Since it turns out that the state is the bearer of intrinsic defects,
and there is no proof that the market economy has these defects, let’s ask
the market economy itself to be the principle, not of the state’s limita-
tion, but of its internal regulation from start to finish of its existence
and action. In other words, instead of accepting a free market defined by
the state and kept as it were under state supervision—which was, in a
way, the initial formula of liberalism: let us establish a space of economic
freedom and let us circumscribe it by a state that will supervise it—the
ordoliberals say we should completely turn the formula around and
adopt the free market as organizing and regulating principle of the state,
from the start of its existence up to the last form of its interventions. In
other words: a state under the supervision of the market rather than a
market supervised by the state.7 February 1979
117
I think this kind of reversal, which the ordoliberals were only able to
carry out on the basis of their analysis of Nazism, enabled them in 1948
to try to resolve the problem they faced of finding a way of giving legit-
imacy to a state that did not yet exist and that had to be made accept-
able to those who most mistrusted it. Well, let’s adopt the free market
and we will have a mechanism that will found the state and at the same
time, by controlling it, will provide the guarantees demanded by those
who have grounds for mistrusting it. This, I think, was the reversal they
carried out.
And what is important and decisive in current neo-liberalism can, I
think, be situated here. For we should not be under any illusion that
today’s neo-liberalism is, as is too often said, the resurgence* or recur-
rence of old forms of liberal economics which were formulated in the
eighteenth and nineteenth centuries and are now being reactivated by
capitalism for a variety of reasons to do with its impotence and crises as
well as with some more or less local and determinate political objectives.
In actual fact, something much more important is at stake in modern
neo-liberalism, whether this takes the German form I am presently
referring to, or the anarcho-liberal American form. What is at issue is
whether a market economy can in fact serve as the principle, form, and
model for a state which, because of its defects, is mistrusted by everyone
on both the right and the left, for one reason or another. Everyone is in
agreement in criticizing the state and identifying its destructive and
harmful effects. But within this general critique—which is also a con-
fused critique since it can be found with little difference from Sombart
to Marcuse—through and in the shadow of this critique, will liberalism
in fact be able to bring about its real objective, that is to say, a general
formalization of the powers of the state and the organization of society
on the basis of the market economy? Can the market really have the
power of formalization for both the state and society? This is the impor-
tant, crucial problem of present-day liberalism and to that extent it rep-
resents an absolutely important mutation with regard to traditional
liberal projects, those that were born in the eighteenth century. It is not
* M.F.: la resurgescence [?]118
t h e b i rt h o f b i o p o l i t i c s
just a question of freeing the economy. It is a question of knowing how
far the market economy’s powers of political and social information
extend. This is the stake. Well, in order to give a positive answer and
affirm that the market economy really can both inform the state and
reform society, or reform the state and inform society, the ordoliberals
carried out a number of shifts, transformations, and inversions in tradi-
tional liberal doctrine, and it is these transformations that I would now
like to explain a little.*
So, the first shift is that of exchange, a shift from exchange to com-
petition in the principle of the market. Putting it again very roughly,
how was the market defined in eighteenth century liberalism, or rather
on what basis was it described? It was defined and described on the
basis of free exchange between two partners who through this exchange
establish the equivalence of two values. The model and principle of the
market was exchange, and the freedom of the market, the non-intervention
of a third party, of any authority whatsoever, and a fortiori of state
authority, was of course applied so that the market was valid and equiv-
alence really was equivalence. The most that was asked of the state was
that it supervise the smooth running of the market, that is to say, that it
ensure respect for the freedom of those involved in exchange. The state
did not have to intervene within the market therefore. On the other
hand, the state was called upon to intervene in production in the sense
that liberal economists in the middle of the eighteenth century said that
when you produce something, that is to say, when you are investing
work in something, it is necessary that everyone respects the individual
ownership of what is produced. It was for this, the necessity of private
property for production, that state authority was demanded. But the
market must be a cleared space free from intervention.
Now for the neo-liberals, the most important thing about the market
is not exchange, that kind of original and fictional situation imagined by
eighteenth century liberal economists. The essential thing of the market is
elsewhere; it is competition. In this, moreover, the neo-liberals only follow
* Foucault pauses at this point to say:
I see that it is late, I don’t really know if I will start now ... What do you want? [Some calls of
“yes” are heard.] Five minutes, no more.7 February 1979
119
a development of liberal thought, of liberal doctrine and theory, in the
nineteenth century. Practically since the end of the nineteenth century,
more or less all liberal theory has accepted that the most important thing
about the market is competition, that is to say, not equivalence but on the
contrary inequality. 49 It is the problem of competition and monopoly,
much more than that of value and equivalence, that forms the essential
armature of a theory of the market. On this point therefore the ordoliber-
als do not depart in any way from the historical development of liberal
thought. They take up this classical conception and the principle that
competition, and only competition, can ensure economic rationality. How
does it ensure economic rationality? Well, it ensures it through the forma-
tion of prices which, precisely to the extent that there is full and complete
competition, can measure economic magnitudes and thus regulate choices.
With regard to this liberalism focused on the problem of competition,
this theory of the market focused on competition, the ordoliberals intro-
duce something that I think is specific to them. In fact, the nineteenth
and twentieth century marginalist and neo-marginalist conception of
the market economy said that since the market can only function
through free and full competition, the state must therefore refrain from
altering the existing state of competition and carefully avoid introdu-
cing elements that will alter this state of competition through phenom-
ena of monopoly, control, and so forth. At the most, it must intervene to
prevent competition being distorted by phenomena like monopoly, for
example. So the same conclusion is still drawn from this principle of the
market economy as was drawn by those of the eighteenth century who
defined the market economy by exchange, namely, laissez-faire. In other
words, from the principle of the market economy, both eighteenth
century and nineteenth* century liberals draw the same conclusion of
the necessity of laissez-faire. The former deduce it from exchange, the
latter deduce it from competition, but in any case the logical, political
consequence of the market economy is laissez-faire.
This is where the ordoliberals break with the tradition of eighteenth
and nineteenth century liberalism. They say: Laissez-faire cannot and
* M.F.: twentieth120
t h e b i rt h o f b i o p o l i t i c s
must* not be the conclusion drawn from the principle of competition as
the organizing form of the market. Why not? Because, they say, when
you deduce the principle of laissez-faire from the market economy, basi-
cally you are still in the grip of what could be called a “naive natural-
ism,” † that is to say, whether you define the market by exchange or by
competition you are thinking of it as a sort of given of nature, something
produced spontaneously which the state must respect precisely inas-
much as it is a natural datum. But, the ordoliberals say—and here it is
easy to spot the influence of Husserl 50 —this is naive naturalism. For
what in fact is competition? It is absolutely not a given of nature. The
game, mechanisms, and effects of competition which we identify and
enhance are not at all natural phenomena; competition is not the result
of a natural interplay of appetites, instincts, behavior, and so on. In real-
ity, the effects of competition are due only to the essence that character-
izes and constitutes it. The beneficial effects of competition are not due
to a pre-existing nature, to a natural given that it brings with it. They
are due to a formal privilege. Competition is an essence. Competition is
an eidos. 51 Competition is a principle of formalization. 52 Competition
has an internal logic; it has its own structure. Its effects are only pro-
duced if this logic is respected. It is, as it were, a formal game between
inequalities; it is not a natural game between individuals and behaviors.
Just as for Husserl a formal structure is only given to intuition under
certain conditions, in the same way competition as an essential
economic logic will only appear and produce its effects under certain
conditions which have to be carefully and artificially constructed. This
means that pure competition is not a primitive given. It can only be the
result of lengthy efforts and, in truth, pure competition is never
attained. Pure competition must and can only be an objective, an objec-
tive thus presupposing an indefinitely active policy. Competition is
therefore an historical objective of governmental art and not a natural
given that must be respected. In this kind of analysis we find, of course,
both the influence of Husserl and, in a somewhat Weberian way, the
* Foucault repeats: can
†
In inverted commas in the manuscript.7 February 1979
121
possibility of connecting up history with the economy. 53 The ordoliber-
als go on to say that the task of economic theory is the analysis of com-
petition as a formal mechanism and the identification of its optimum
effects. But what actually takes place in the societies we know cannot be
analyzed on the basis of this theory of competition. We can only analyze
it by taking the real historical systems within which these formal eco-
nomic processes function and are formed and conditioned. Consequently,
we need an historical analysis of the systems that intersect, as it were, as
a horizontal intersects a vertical, the formal analysis of economic
processes. Economics analyzes the formal processes and history will
analyze the systems in which the operation of these formal processes is
either possible or impossible. 54
The third consequence they draw from this is that the relation
between an economy of competition and a state can no longer be one of
the reciprocal delimitation of different domains. There will not be the
market game, which must be left free, and then the domain in which the
state begins to intervene, since the market, or rather pure competition,
which is the essence of the market, can only appear if it is produced, and
if it is produced by an active governmentality. There will thus be a sort
of complete superimposition of market mechanisms, indexed to compe-
tition, and governmental policy. Government must accompany the mar-
ket economy from start to finish. The market economy does not take
something away from government. Rather, it indicates, it constitutes the
general index in which one must place the rule for defining all govern-
mental action. One must govern for the market, rather than because of
the market. To that extent you can see that the relationship defined by
eighteenth century liberalism is completely reversed. The problem thus
becomes, what type of delimitation of government follows from this
principle, or rather, what will be the effect on the art of government of
this general principle that the market is what ultimately must be
produced in government? And like a good serial, this is what I will try
to explain next week.122
t h e b i rt h o f b i o p o l i t i c s
1. Walter Eucken (1891–1950): head of the German neo-liberal school (Freiburg School)
whose positions were expounded in the journal Ordo (see below, note 8). He studied eco-
nomics at Bonn and Berlin, where he was a student of Heinrich Dietzel, an opponent of the
historical school, and of one of the last figures of this school, Hermann Schumacher, the
successor of Gustav Schmoller at the University of Berlin. After becoming Schumacher’s
assistant, Eucken broke with him in 1923, noting the inability of historicism to respond to
the problem of inflation. He was nominated professor at Tübingen in 1925, and then at
Freiburg in 1927, where he remained until his death. See F. Bilger, La Pensée économique
libérale de l’Allemagne contemporaine, pp. 39–70.
2. On the relations between Eucken and Husserl, see F. Bilger, ibid., p. 47: “On his arrival in
the town, Eucken established a deep friendship with Husserl, spiritually linked to Rudolf
Eucken. The two men had frequent contacts, sadly quickly interrupted by the philoso-
pher’s death. In his works Eucken acknowledged the influence of the founder of phenome-
nology on the formation of his economic method. In particular, he often refers to Husserl’s
great book, Die logische Untersuchungen (Halle: S. Niemeyer, 1928); English translation by
J.N. Findlay, Logical Investigations (London: Routledge, 2001) 2 volumes), the critical and
positive aspect of which he transposes into political economy.” For a more precise analysis,
see R. Klump, “On the phenomenological roots of German Ordnungstheorie: what Walter
Eucken owes to Edmund Husserl” in P. Commun, ed., L’Ordolibéralisme allemand: aux sources
de l’économie sociale de marche (University of Cergy-Pontoise, CIRAC/CICC, 2003)
pp. 149–162.
3. Among whom Hans Grossmann-Doerth and Franz Böhm (on the latter, see below note
11). See F. Bilger, La Pensée économique libérale, pp. 47–48 and 71–74. On Kelsen, see Sécurité,
Territoire, Population; Security, Territory, Population, lecture of 25 January 1978, note 1.
4. W. Eucken, “Staatliche Strukturwandlungen und die Krisis des Kapitalismus” [Structural
modifications of the state and crisis of capitalism], Weltwirtschaftliches Archiv, Jena, vol. 36 (2),
1932, pp. 297–321.
5. Wilhelm Lautenbach (1891–1948); see especially his article: “Auswirkungen der unmittel-
baren Arbeitsbeschaffung,” Wirtschaft und Statistik, vol. 13, no. 21, 1933, republished in
G. Bombach and others, eds., Der Keynesianismus (Berlin: Springer, 1981) pp. 301–308, and
his posthumous work, Zins, Kredit und Produktion (Tübingen: J.C.B. Mohr, 1952).
6. Hjalmar Greely Horace Schacht (1877–1970), first of all President of the Reichsbank, from
November 1923 to March 1930, and then Minister for the Economy from July 1934 to
November 1937. He was opposed to Göring and to arms expenditure (see below, note 36),
but retained the title of Minister without portfolio until 1943. See J. François-Poncet, La
Politique économique de l’Allemagne occidentale, pp. 21–22.
7. Quite the opposite. From the end of 1933 Eucken took part in a seminar organized by the
economist Karl Diehl, which brought together opponents of Nazism from various faculties
(among whom were the historian Gerhard Ritter and the theologian Clemens Bauer). He
was resolutely committed against the policy directed by Heidegger in the administration of
the University of Freiburg. He was a co-founder, with several Catholic and Protestant theo-
logians, of the Freiburger Konzil, which was without doubt the only university group of
opposition to Nazism after the 1938 pogroms, and during the war he took part in the dis-
cussions of the Arbeitsgemeinschaft Volkwirtschaftslehre, organized by Erwin von Beckerath, at
the heart of Gruppe IV (responsible for economic questions) of the Akademie für Deutsches
Recht founded by the Nazis in 1933–34 with the aim of Germanizing the law. Gruppe IV was
created in January 1940. Its organizer, Jens Jessen, who became a fervent opponent of
National Socialism, was executed in November 1944 for his participation in the July Plot
against Hitler. Gruppe IV itself, which constituted an underground opposition forum, was
suppressed in March 1943, but discussions between economists—especially around the
transition economy of the post-war period—continued within a private framework of the
“Beckerath circle.” Eucken published several articles during this period. See H. Rieter and
M. Schmolz, “The ideas of German Ordoliberalism 1938–1945: pointing the way to a new
economic order,” The European Journal of the History of Economic Thought, I (1), Autumn
1993, pp. 87–114; R. Klump, “On the phenomenological roots of German Ordnungstheorie”
pp. 158–160.7 February 1979
123
8. Foucault confuses here the date of publication of the preface, co-signed by F. Böhm,
W. Eucken, and H. Grossmann-Doerth with the title “Our task,” in the first volume of the
series Die Ordnung der Wirtschaft directed by these three authors (see the English transla-
tion with the title “The Ordo Manifesto of 1936” in A. Peacock and H. Willgerodt, eds.,
Germany’s Social Market Economy: Origins and evolution [London: Macmillan, 1989]
pp. 14–26) and that of the first issue of the journal Ordo in 1948. The latter appeared in the
form of an annual volume from 1948 to 1974 (Düsseldorf: Helmut Küpper) and from 1975
(Stuttgart: Gustav Fischer).
9. W. Eucken, Die Grundlagen der Nationalökonomie (Jena: G. Fischer, 1940, 2nd ed. 1942);
English translation by T.W. Hutchison, The Foundations of Economics: History and theory in the
analysis of economic reality (London: William Hodge, 1950).
10. See above, lecture of 31 January 1979, note 19.
11. Franz Böhm (1895–1977). Legal counselor to the Minister for the Economy from 1925 to
1932. He taught law at the universities of Freiburg and Jena from 1933 to 1938, but had to
resign due to his opposition to the anti-Semitic policy. After the war he became Minister
of Cultural Affairs in Hesse (1945–1946) and then professor of civil law and economics at
the University of Frankfurt. He was a member (CDU) of the Bundestag from 1953 to 1965
and from 1948 to 1977 he played an active role in the Scientific Council of the Verwaltung
für Wirtschaft des Vereinigten Wirtschaftsgebietes in Frankfurt. In 1965 he became the first
German ambassador to Israel. His main works are: Wettbewerb und Monopolkampf (Berlin:
C. Heymann, 1933); Die Ordnung der Wirtschaft als geschichtliche Aufgabe und rechtsschöpferische
Leistung (Stuttgart-Berlin: Kohlhammer, 1937); Wirtschaftsordnung und Staatsverfassung
(Tübingen: J.C.B. Mohr, 1950). See too his Reden und Schriften (Karlsruhe: C.F. Müller,
1960). With W. Eucken and H. Grossmann-Doerth, he was one of the co-signatories of the
1936 “Ordoliberal manifesto” (see above, note 8).
12. Alfred Müller-Armack (1901–1978). Assistant in economics at the University of Cologne
from 1926, he obtained a professorial chair at Münster in 1940, and then again at Cologne
in 1950. He joined the National Socialist Party in 1933 while condemning its racial doc-
trine (see his book, Staatsidee und Wirtschaftsordnung im neuen Reich [Berlin: Junker and
Dünnhaupt, 1933]), and he then progressively distanced himself from the party in the
name of his religious convictions. From 1952 to 1963 he was appointed ministerial director
to the Minister for the Economy and Secretary of State for European problems. In this
capacity he took part in the drafting of the Rome Treaty. He resigned in 1963 in order to
take up posts in the administrative councils of several big enterprises. In addition, he was
a member of the Mont Pèlerin group, created in Switzerland in 1947 on the initiative of
F. Hayek, with a view to the defense of free enterprise, and other members of which were
L. von Mises, W. Röpke, and M. Friedman. See F. Bilger, La Pensée économique libérale,
pp. 111–112. His main works (apart from his Genealogie der Wirtschaftsstile, see below note 14)
are: Wirtschaftslenkung und Marktwirtschaft (Düsseldorf: Verlag Wirtschaft und Finanzen,
1946, 2nd ed. 1948); Diagnose unserer Gegenwart. Zur Bestimmung unseres geistesgeschichtlichen
Standortes (Gütersloh: Bertelsmann, 1949); Religion und Wirschaft. Geistesgeschichtliche
Hintergründe unserer europäischen Lebensform (Stuttgart: Kohlhammer, 1959).
13. Actually it was Cologne, see the previous note.
14. A. Müller-Armack, Genealogie der Wirtschaftsstile: die geistesgeschichtlichen Ursprünge der Staats-
und Wirtschaftsformen bis zum Augang des 18.Jahrhunderts (Stuttgart: Alfred Kohlhammer,
1941, 3rd ed. 1944). The author “tried to show that the economic organization of a time is
the economic translation of the dominant ‘Weltanschauung’” and “deduced [from this] the
need to construct a post-war economy in line with a new ‘style of life’ that the Germans
intended to adopt” (F. Bilger, La Pensée économique libérale, pp. 109–110).
15. The concept of “economic style” (Wirtschaftsstil), designating the overall socio-economic
form of a society in a given epoch, was forged by A. Spiethoff (“Die allgemeine
Volkswirtschaftslehre als geschichtliche Theorie. Die Wirtschaftsstile,” Schmollers Jahrbuch
für Gesetzgebung, Verwaltung und Wirtschaft im Deutschen Reich, 56, II, 1932) in order to deepen
and clarify the concept of “economic system” (Wirtschaftssystem), introduced by W. Sombart
in the 1920s: Die Ordnung des Wirtschaftslebens (Berlin: Julius Springer, 1927); Die drei
Nationalökonomien—Gesischte und System der Lehre von der Wirtschaft (Berlin: Duncker and
Humblot, 1930). It is therefore in partial continuity with the problematic of the German124
16.
17.
18.
19.
20.
21.
22.
t h e b i rt h o f b i o p o l i t i c s
historical school, while exhibiting a concern for a more rigorous typological analysis. The
concept was critically examined by W. Eucken, Die Grundlagen der Nationalökonomie,
pp. 71–74; The Foundations of Economics, pp. 90–93. See H. Möller, “Wirtschaftsordnung,
Wirtschaftssystem und Wirtschaftsstil: ein Vegleich der Auffassungen von W. Eucken,
W. Sombart und A. Spiethoff,” in Schmollers Jahrbuch für Gesetzgebung, Verwaltung und
Volkswirtschaft (Berlin: Duncker and Humblot, 64, 1940) pp. 75–98. In his articles from
the 1950s and 1960s, Müller-Armack frequently uses the concept of style to define the
program of action of the social market economy. See, for example, “Stil und Ordnung der
sozialen Marktwirtschaft” (1952) in A. Müller-Armack, Wirtschaftsordnung und
Wirtschaftspolitik (Fribourg-en-Brisgau: Rombach, 1966) pp. 231–242. See S. Broyer,
“Ordnungstheorie et ordolibéralisme: les leçons de la tradition” in P. Commun, ed.,
L’Ordolibéralisme allemand, pp. 90–95.
Wilhelm Röpke (1899–1966): professor of economics at the University of Marbourg, until
his dismissal for political reasons. A convinced follower of neo-marginalism, he was desig-
nated to be a member of an official commission to study unemployment in 1930–31. See
F. Bilger, La Pensée économique libérale, pp. 93–103; J. François-Poncet, La Politique économique,
pp. 56–57.
Kurt von Schleicher (1882–1934): Minister of the Reichswehr (June 1932), he became
Chancellor after the resignation of von Papen (December 1932) but had to give way to
Hitler in January 1933. He was assassinated by the Nazis the following year. It seems that
Foucault here mixes up Röpke and Rüstow (see below, note 23). It was actually to the lat-
ter that Schleicher wanted to give the Ministry of Economic Affairs in January 1933.
... where he meets the sociologist Alexander Rustöw, who was also an émigré.
In 1937. He taught there at the Institut des hautes études internationales. He also presided
over the Mont-Pèlerin Society (see above, note 12) from 1960 to 1962.
W. Röpke, Ist die deutsche Wirtschaftspolitik richtig? Analyse und Kritik (Stuttgart:
Kohlhammer, 1950) (see F. Bilger, La Pensée économique libérale, p. 97); republished in
W. Stützel and others, eds., Grundtexte zur sozialen Marktwirtschaft, pp. 49–62 (see above,
lecture of 31 January 1979, note 21).
W. Röpke, Die Gesellschaftskrisis der Gegenwart (Erlanbach-Zurich: E. Rentsch, 1942, 4th ed.
1945); French translation by H. Faesi and Ch. Reichard, La Crise de notre temps (Neuchâtel:
Éd. de La Baconnière, 1945, edition with reduced annotations and no index; republished,
Paris: “Petite Bibliothèque Payot,” 1962); English translation by Annette and Peter
Schiffer Jacobsohn, (Roepke) The Social Crisis of Our Time (London: William Hodge,
1950). The work was banned in Germany shortly after publication (see the Völkische
Beobachter of 11 July 1942). The other volumes completing this book are, Civitas Humana:
Grundfragen der Gesellschafts- und Wirtschaftsreform (Erlenbach-Zurich: E. Rentsch, 1944);
French translation by P. Bastier, Civitas Humana, ou les Questions fondamentales de la Réforme
économique et sociale: capitalisme, collectivisme, humanisme économique, État, société, économie (Paris:
Librairie de Médicis, 1946); English translation by Cyril Spencer Fox, Civitas Humana. A
Humane Order of Society (London: William Hodge, 1948), and Internationale Ordnung
(Erlenbach-Zurich: E. Rentsch, 1945); French translation [anon.], La Communauté interna-
tionale (Geneva: C. Bourquin, 1947); English translation, International Order and Economic
integration (Dordrecht: Reidel, 1959). In 1947 Röpke also published a book on the “German
question,” Die deutsche Frage (Erlenbach-Zurich: E. Rentsch); English translation by
E.W. Dickes, The German Question (London: George Allen & Unwin, 1946), in which he
recommends a constitutional monarchy as a way of re-establishing the Rechtsstaat.
E. Husserl, Die Krisis der europäischen Wissenschaften und die transzendentale Phänomenologie
(W. Biemel: 1954); English translation by D. Carr, The Crisis of European Sciences and
Transcendental Phenomenology (Evanston Ill.: Northwestern University Press, 1970). If the
definitive version belongs to Husserl’s posthumous works, the first part, which was the
material of two lectures in Vienna and Prague in 1935, was published in Belgrade in 1936,
in Arthur Liebert’s journal, Philosophia. It is therefore possible that Röpke knew of the text.
However he makes no explicit reference to it. His source, or his implicit reference, is reli-
gious rather than philosophical. See Civitas Humana, p. xvii: “( ... ) a careful reader of the
celebrated but much misunderstood papal Encyclical ‘Quadragesimo Anno’ will find a
social and economic philosophy expressed therein which at heart comes to much the same7 February 1979
23.
24.
25.
26.
27.
28.
29.
30.
125
conclusion [as Die Gesellschaftskrisis der Gegenwart; The Social Crisis of Our Time].” On this
encyclical, see above, lecture of 31 January 1979, note 31.
Alexander Rüstow (1885–1963), son of Prussian general officer. As a radical socialist he
belonged to the first generation of the Jugendbewegung. After the First World War he was
employed in the Ministry for the economy and in 1924 he became scientific counselor of the
Verein deutscher Maschinenbauanstalten (VDMA, The Confederation of German Machine
Constructors). His adoption of a position favorable to social liberalism made him the tar-
get of Communists and National Socialists. After his exile in 1933, with Röpke’s help, he
obtained a post as professor of economic and social history at Istanbul, where he remained
until 1947. In 1950 he succeeded Alfred Weber in the chair of economic sociology. His main
works are: Das Versagen des Wirtschaftsliberalismus als religionsgeschichtliches Problem [The fail-
ure of economic liberalism, a problem of religious history] (Istanbul, 1945) and his monu-
mental trilogy: Ortsbestimmung der Gegenwart [Determination of the place of the present]
(Erlenbach-Zurich: E. Rentsch) volume 1: Ursprung der Herrschaft [The origin of domina-
tion], 1950; volume 2: Weg der Freiheit [The road of freedom], 1952; and volume 3:
Herrschaft oder Freiheit, 1955, [abridged English translation by Salvator Attanasio, Freedom
or Domination: a Historical Critique of Civilisation, ed. A. Dankwart (Princeton: Princeton
University Press, 1980)], see the review by C.J. Friedrich, “The political thought of Neo-
liberalism,” The American Political Science Review, 49 (2) June 1955, pp. 514–525.
Friedrich von Hayek: born in Vienna 8 May 1899; studies law and political sciences at
Vienna where he follows F. von. Wieser’s (1851–1926) courses on political economy and
takes part in the informal seminars organized in his office by Ludwig von Mises, then a func-
tionary in the Chamber of Commerce. Hayek, who still leans towards the socializing thought
of the Fabians, soon adheres to the ultra-liberal theses defended by Mises in his book
Socialism (see lecture of 31 January 1979, note 11). Director of the Viennese Institute for eco-
nomic research (the vice president of which is Mises), he leaves Austria for London in 1931.
Appointed professor of social and moral sciences at the University of Chicago in 1952, he
returns to Germany in 1962 to finish his career at the University of Freiburg. Apart from the
works cited in notes (see above, lecture of 10 January 1979, note 3, and below, this lecture,
note 33), Hayek is the author of: Prices and Production (London: George Routledge and Sons,
1931); Individualism and Economic Order (Chicago and London: University of Chicago Press—
Routledge and Kegan Paul, 1949); The Counter-Revolution of Science: Studies of the abuse of rea-
son (Glencoe, Ill.: Free Press, 1952); Law, Legislation and Liberty, vol. 1: Rules and Order; vol. 2:
The Mirage of Social Justice; vol. 3: The Political Order of a Free People (Chicago and London:
University of Chicago Press—Routledge and Kegan Paul, 1973–1979).
Proclaimed on 9 November 1918, following the announcement of the abdication of William
II, endowed with a constitution in 1919, the Weimar Republic (1919–1933) had to confront
considerable economic difficulties due, in particular, to inflation accentuated by the costs of
reparations and to the shock of the 1929 crisis that encouraged the development of extrem-
ist movements.
Max Weber (1864–1920). It is not clear that Foucault is referring here to Weber’s great
work, Wirtschaft und Gesellschaft (Tübingen: J.C.B. Mohr, 1922; 4th ed. by J. Winckelmann,
1956); partial French translation J. Chavy and E. de Dampierre (Paris: Plon, 1971); English
translation by Ephraim Fischoff and others, Economy and Society. An Outline of Interpretive
Sociology (Berkeley and London: University of California Press, 1979) or rather to The
Protestant Ethic and The Spirit of Capitalism already referred to (see above, lecture of
31 January 1979, note 25).
On the abundant literature on the relation of Weber to Marx, and the contradictory points
of view it contains, see C. Colliot-Thélène, “Max Weber et l’héritage de la conception
matérialiste de l’histoire,” in Études wébériennes (Paris: PUF, 2001) pp. 103–132.
Max Horkheimer (1895–1973), co-founder of the Institut für Sozialforschung (Institute for
Social Research), created at Frankfurt in 1923, which he reorganizes from 1931. Dismissed
in 1933, he directed the Genevan annex of the Institute and then settled in New York in
1934. He returned to Germany in April 1948.
See above, lecture of 31 January 1979, pp. 82–84.
Ludwig Joseph (Lujo) Brentano (1844–1931): member of the Young Historical School
guided by Gustav von Schmoller (1838–1917). See Joseph A. Schumpeter, History of126
31.
32.
33.
34.
35.
36.
37.
38.
t h e b i rt h o f b i o p o l i t i c s
Economic Analysis, p. 809. F. Bilger, La Pensée économique libérale, pp. 25–26, presents him as
“the founder of German liberalism”: “He preached a liberalism that had to distinguish
itself from English liberalism by a program that was not only negative, but also positive,
particularly in the social domain. The state must therefore intervene, and Brentano was
part of the ‘Verein für Sozialpolitik’ founded by the state socialists; he supported the social
policy carried out by the Empire, and he approved the formation of workers’ unions that,
according to him, enabled equilibrium to be reestablished between forces on the labor
market.”
Friedrich List (1789–1846), Das nationale System der politischen Ökonomie (Stuttgart-
Tübingen: Cotta, 1841); French translation by H. Richelot, Système nationale d’économie
politique (Paris: Capelle, 1857; republished “Tel,” 1998). On List’s role in the genesis of
the “protection of infant industries,” see W. Röpke (Roepke), The Social Crisis of our Time,
pp. 55–62.
Deutscher Zollverein: Customs union of the German States carried out in the nineteenth cen-
tury under Prussian direction. Initiated in 1818, extended in 1854 to almost all of Germany,
it made a strong contribution to the transformation of Germany into a major economic
power. On this subject see Foucault’s comments in the last pages of the manuscript for the
preceding lecture (above p. 95).
Walther Rathenau (1867–1922): Jewish industrialist who, from 1915, was in charge of the
organization of the German war economy. Minister of Foreign Affairs in 1922, he was assas-
sinated by two nationalists of the extreme right. See, W. Röpke, Civitas Humana, p. 79, note
1 to p. 63: “Eternal Saint-Simonism which inherits from its founder the ideas of a planning
hungering for power meets us again in the tragic figure of Walter Rathenau, the great
German industrialist and engineer, himself a victim of a most tragic period, who, together
with other engineer friends invented if not the thing itself at least the phrase ‘Planned
Economy’ (Planwirtschaft). He also became what a little later was called a ‘Technocrat.’”
See too F. Hayek, The Road to Serfdom (Chicago: University of Chicago Press; London:
Routledge, 1944) p. 129, which underlines the influence of his ideas on the economic
options of the Nazi regime.
See above, this lecture note 5.
See above, this lecture note 6.
The four-year plan asserted the absolute priority of rearmament. On the role and organi-
zation of the office of the four-year plan directed by Göring, see F. Neuman, Behemoth: The
structure and practice of National Socialism (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1944)
pp. 247–254, with table on p. 253. For a synthesis of the most recent work on this moment
of German economic policy, see I. Kershaw, Nazi Dictatorship: Problems and perspectives of
interpretation (London and New York: E. Arnold, 1996) pp. 59–61. See also H. James, The
German Slump: Politics and economics, 1924–1936 (Oxford: Clarendon Press; New York:
Oxford University Press, 1986).
See F. Hayek, The Road to Serfdom, p. 129: “Through his writings he [Rathenau] has
probably, more than any other man, determined the economic views of the generation
which grew up in Germany during and immediately after the last war; and some of his
closest collaborators were later to form the backbone of the staff of Göring’s Five Year Plan
administration.”
Appointed by Churchill, in 1940, president of an inter-ministerial committee responsible
for proposing improvements to the English system of social protection. William Beveridge
(1879–1963) published a first report in 1942, Social Insurance and Allied Services (New York:
Agathon Press, 1969), in which he recommended a generalized, unified, and centralized
system of social protection, as well as the creation of a health service free and accessible to
all, and then a second report in 1944, Full Employment in a Free Society (London: George
Allen & Unwin, 1944), that broadly helped to popularize Keynesian theses. The first
report was never fully translated into French (on the syntheses, commentaries, and analy-
ses published in French in the 1940s, see N. Kerschen, “L’influence du rapport Beveridge
sur le plan français de sécurité sociale in 1945,” Revue française de science politique, vol. 45 (4),
August 1995, p. 571). See R. Servoise, Le Premier Plan Beveridge, le Second Plan Beveridge
(Paris: Domat-Montchrestien, 1946). Foucault refers to the Beveridge plan in various lec-
tures and interviews. See especially, “Crise de la médecine our crise de l’antimédicine?”7 February 1979
39.
40.
41.
42.
43.
44.
45.
46.
47.
48.
127
(1976) Dits et Écrits, 3, pp. 40–42; “Un système fini face à une demande infinie” (1983),
Dits et Écrits, 4, p. 373; English translation by Alan Sheridan as “Social Security” in Michel
Foucault. Politics, Philosophy, Culture. Interviews and other writings 1977–1984, ed. Lawrence D.
Kritzman, translated by Alan Sheridan and others (New York and London: Routledge,
1988) p. 166.
W. Röpke, “Das Beveridgeplan,” Schweizerische Monatshefte für Politik und Kultur, June-July
1943. This criticism of the Beveridge plan is summarized by Röpke in Civitas Humana,
pp. 142–149 (see above, lecture of 7 March 1979, note 5). Referring to Foucault’s comments
in this passage, K. Tribe, in his Strategies of Economic Order, German Economic Discourse
1750–1950 (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1995) p. 240, notes: “There is some
artistic licence at work here: for Röpke does not seem to have committed himself in so many
words.”
On the juridical structure of the National Socialist State, Foucault had read, notably, the
works of M. Cot, La Conception hitlérienne du droit, doctoral thesis (Toulous: Impr. du
Commerce, 1938), and R. Bonnard, Le Droit et l’État dans la doctrine national-socialist (Paris:
Librairie Générale de Droit et de Jurisprudence, 1936, 2nd ed. 1939).
Werner Sombart (1863–1941): with A. Spiethoff and M. Weber, he was one of the main rep-
resentatives of the last generation of the German historical school. Professor of economics
at Berlin from 1917. His first major work, Der moderne Kapitalismus (Leipzig: Duncker &
Humblot, 1902) is a continuation of Marx’s theses and wins him a socialist reputation. In
1924 he adheres to the program of the conservative revolution and in 1933 becomes a mem-
ber of the Akademie für deutsches Recht. Despite his adherence to the Führer principle, he does
not subscribe to the National Socialist racial theories. His last books, including, Deutscher
Sozialismus were badly received by the regime.
Deutscher Sozialismus (Berlin-Charlottenburg: Buchholz und Weisswange, 1934); English
translation by K.F. Geiser as, A New Social Philosophy (Princeton and London: Princeton
University Press, 1934); French translation by G. Welter as Le Socialisme allemand: une théorie
nouvelle de la société (Paris: Payot, 1938), republished with a Preface by A. de Benoist (Paris:
Pardès “Révolution conservatrice,” 1990).
See H. Marcuse, One-dimensional Man: Studies in the ideology of advanced industrial societies
(Boston: Beacon Press, 1964).
W. Sombart, A New Social Philosophy, Part One: “The economic era” ch. 2, “The
Reconstruction of Society and the State” and ch. 3, “The Intellectual life” pp. 16–41.
W. Sombart, Der Moderne Kapitalismus; French translation by S. Jankélévitch as L’Apogée du
capitalisme (Paris: Payot, 1932) Part III, ch. 53, and Das Proletariat (Frankfurt am Main:
Rütter und Loening, 1906) in which he denounced the solitude and uprooting of workers
produced by the “economic era.”
See G. Debord, La Société du spectacle (Paris: Buchet-Chastel, 1967). The books by Marcuse
and Debord to which Foucault alludes here were the two major references of the
Situationist critique from the end of the 1960s (see already the final lecture of the previ-
ous year’s lectures, Sécurité, Territoire, Population; Security, Territory, Population, lecture of
5 April 1978, p. 338, and note 15).
See W. Röpke, Civitas Humana: “His success rests on the fact that from ‘scientism’ he drew
the final consequences for politics and the life of society and thus inevitably arrived by
these means at the only possible destination, namely Collectivism. This represents the sci-
entific elimination of the Human element in political and economic practice. His dubious
glory it is that he created the model for a world and social outlook which may be described
as eternal Saint-Simonism; that attitude of mind which is the outcome of a mixture of the
hubris of the natural scientist and engineer mentality of those who, with the cult of the
‘Colossal’ combine their egotistical urge to assert themselves; those who would construct
and organise economics, the State and society according to supposedly scientific laws and
blueprints, whilst mentally reserving for themselves the principal porte-feuilles.”
Claude Henri de Rouvroy, comte de Saint-Simon (1760–1825), French philosopher,
economist, and social reformer, who, in Du système industriel (1821) (Paris: Anthropos,
1966), to remedy the crisis opened up by the Revolution, presented a plan of “general
overhaul of the social system” (p. 11) replacing the old “feudal and military system” (p. 12)
with the “industrial system” founded on the domination of industrialists and scientists and128
49.
50.
51.
52.
53.
54.
t h e b i rt h o f b i o p o l i t i c s
organizing the whole of society in terms of the “industrial aim” (p. 19). See also Catéchisme
des industriels (Paris: Impr. de Sétier, 1824–1825) in four volumes, the third volume of which
was redrafted by Auguste Comte. After his death, his disciples—Rodrigues, Enfantin, and
Bazard—were organized in a Society around the journal Le Producteur. Their movement
played an important role in the colonial policy of the July monarchy, the construction of the
first railways, and building the Suez canal.
See below, lecture of 21 February 1979, p. 166, the more explicit reference to Walras,
Marshall, and Wicksell.
Reference to the Husserlian eidetic reduction is found in Eucken from 1934 in the essay,
“Was leistet die nationalökonomische Theorie?” published as an introduction to his
Kapitaltheoretische Untersuchungen (Jena: Fischer, 1934), in which he theorizes his method for
the first time—a procedure of abstraction effectuated by the “Reduktion des tatsächlich
Gegebenen auf reine Fälle” (the reduction of the factual given to pure cases) p. 21.
On the intuition of the essence, or eidos, in opposition to empirical intuition, see
E. Husserl, Ideas. General Introduction to Pure Phenomenology, translated by W.R. Boyce Gibson
(London/New York: George Allen and Unwin/Humanities Press, 1969).
See F. Bilger, La Pensée économique libérale, p. 155: “The liberals do not see the theory of per-
fect competition as a positive theory, but as a normative theory, an ideal type that one must
strive to achieve.”
See above, this lecture, p. 105.
See F. Bilger, La Pensée économique libérale, p. 52: “According to Walter Eucken, economic
morphology [i.e., the typological analysis of economic systems] offers ‘a strong link
between the empirical view of historical events and the general theoretical analysis neces-
sary for the comprehension of relations.’ ” On the connection between the morphological
analysis of the framework and the theoretical analysis of economic processes within this,
see, ibid. pp. 54–55.six
14 February 1979
[ ]
German neo-liberalism (III). ⵑ Usefulness of historical
analyses for the present. ⵑ How is neo-liberalism distinguished
from classical liberalism? ⵑ Its specific stake: how to model the
global exercise of political power on the principles of a market
economy, and the transformations that derive from this. ⵑ The
decoupling of the market economy and policies of laissez-faire. ⵑ
The Walter Lippmann colloquium (26 to 30 August 1938). ⵑ
The problem of the style of governmental action. Three examples:
(a) the question of monopolies; (b) the question of “conformable
actions (actions conformes).” The bases of economic policy
according to W. Eucken. Regulatory actions and organizing actions
(actions ordonnatrices); (c) social policy. The ordoliberal
critique of the welfare economy. ⵑ Society as the point of
application of governmental interventions. The “policy of society”
(Gesellschaftspolitik). ⵑ First aspect of this policy: the
formalization of society on the model of the enterprise. ⵑ
Enterprise society and judicial society; two faces of a single
phenomenon.
TODAY I WOULD LIKE to continue with what I began to say
about German neo-liberalism. When you talk about contemporary neo-
liberalism, whether German or any other kind, you generally get three
types of response.130
t h e b i rt h o f b i o p o l i t i c s
The first is that from the economic point of view neo-liberalism is no
more than the reactivation of old, secondhand economic theories.
The second is that from the sociological point of view it is just a way
of establishing strictly market relations in society.
And finally, the third response is that from a political point of view
neo-liberalism is no more than a cover for a generalized administrative
intervention by the state which is all the more profound for being insid-
ious and hidden beneath the appearances of a neo-liberalism.
You can see that these three types of response ultimately make neo-
liberalism out to be nothing at all, or anyway, nothing but always the
same thing, and always the same thing but worse. That is to say: it is just
Adam Smith revived; second, it is the market society that was decoded
and denounced in Book I of Capital; and third, it is the generalization of
state power, that is to say, it is Solzhenitsyn on a world scale. 1
Adam Smith, Marx, Solzhenitsyn, laissez-faire; society of the market
and spectacle, the world of the concentration camp and the Gulag:
broadly speaking these are the three analytical and critical frameworks
with which this problem of neo-liberalism is usually approached, and
which therefore enable it to be turned into practically nothing at all,
repeating the same type of critique for two hundred, one hundred, or ten
years. Now what I would like to show you is precisely that neo-liberalism
is really something else. Whether it is of great significance or not, I don’t
know, but assuredly it is something, and I would like to try to grasp it
in its singularity. If it is true that important and even invaluable politi-
cal effects can be produced by historical analyses which present them-
selves precisely as historical and which seek to detect types of practice,
institutional forms, etcetera, which exist and function for a time in cer-
tain places, if it is important to show what a [mechanism like]* the
prison was at a given moment and to see what effect this purely histor-
ical type of analysis produces in a present situation, this absolutely
never consists in saying, either implicitly or with more reason explicitly,
that what existed then is the same as what exists now. The problem is
to let knowledge of the past work on the experience of the present. It is
* Conjecture: inaudible word14 February 1979
131
not at all a matter of coating the present in a form that is recognized in
the past but still reckoned to be valid in the present. It is this transfer
of the political effects of an historical analysis in the form of a simple
repetition that is undoubtedly what is to be avoided at any cost, and that
is why I stress this problem of neo-liberalism in order to try to detach it
from these critiques made on the basis of the pure and simple trans-
position of historical moulds. Neo-liberalism is not Adam Smith; neo-
liberalism is not market society; neo-liberalism is not the Gulag on the
insidious scale of capitalism.
So, what is this neo-liberalism? Last week I tried to indicate at least
its theoretical and political principle. I tried to show you how the prob-
lem of neo-liberalism was not how to cut out or contrive a free space of the
market within an already given political society, as in the liberalism of
Adam Smith and the eighteenth century. The problem of neo-liberalism is
rather how the overall exercise of political power can be modeled on the
principles of a market economy. So it is not a question of freeing an
empty space, but of taking the formal principles of a market economy
and referring and relating them to, of projecting them on to a general art
of government. This, I think, is what is at stake, and I tried to show you
that in order to carry out this operation, that is to say, to discover how
far and to what extent the formal principles of a market economy can
index a general art of government, the neo-liberals had to subject classi-
cal liberalism to a number of transformations.
The first of these, which I tried to show you last week, was basically
that of dissociating the market economy from the political principle of
laissez-faire. I think this uncoupling of the market economy and laissez-
faire policies was achieved, or was defined, at any rate, its principle was
laid down, when the neo-liberals put forward a theory of pure competi-
tion in which competition was not presented as in any way a primitive
and natural given, the very source and foundation of society that only
had to be allowed to rise to the surface and be rediscovered as it were. Far
from it being this, competition was a structure with formal properties,
[and] it was these formal properties of the competitive structure that
assured, and could assure, economic regulation through the price mech-
anism. Consequently, if competition really was this formal structure,
both rigorous in its internal structure but fragile in its real, historical132
t h e b i rt h o f b i o p o l i t i c s
existence, then the problem of liberal policy was precisely to develop in
fact the concrete and real space in which the formal structure of compe-
tition could function. So, it is a matter of a market economy without
laissez-faire, that is to say, an active policy without state control. Neo-
liberalism should not therefore be identified with laissez-faire, but
rather with permanent vigilance, activity, and intervention.
This is very clear in most of the neo-liberal texts,* and there is one to
which I refer you (if you can find it, for it is not easy to find; it was
strangely lost by the Bibliothèque nationale, but you will certainly find
it at the Musée social 2 ). This text is the summary of the contributions
made in 1939, on the eve of the war, in a colloquium called the “Walter
Lippmann Colloquium.” 3 It was held in France 4 following the publica-
tion of Lippmann’s book which was translated into French with the title
La Cité [libre † ]. 5 It is a curious book because, on the one hand, it takes
up the themes of classical liberalism in the form of a pure and simple
reactivation, but, on the other hand, in a number of respects it also pre-
sents elements that form part of neo-liberalism. His book had just
appeared in the United States, was translated into French, and a collo-
quium was held in Paris in which Walter Lippmann himself took part
along with old liberals of the classical tradition, some French people like
Baudin, 6 for example, 7 and then some of the German or Austrian neo-
liberals, those precisely who formed part of the Freiburg School, some of
whom who were exiled from Germany and others silenced in Germany,
and for whom the colloquium was an opportunity for them to express
their point of view. Röpke, 8 Rüstow, Hayek, and von Mises took part in
the colloquium. 9 And then there were the intermediaries: Jacques
Rueff, 10 Marjolin, 11 who is nonetheless important in the post-war
French economy, and the general secretary of the congress, Raymond
Aron, 12 who did not speak, or, at least, does not appear in the proceed-
ings. Following the colloquium—I just signal this, because there are
people who are particularly interested in the structures of the signifier—
it is decided, in July 1939, 13 to form a permanent committee that will be
* M.F.: neo-positivist
†
M.F.: future14 February 1979
133
called “Comité international d’étude pour le renouveau du libéralisme,”
CIERL. 14 In the course of this colloquium the specific propositions
peculiar to neo-liberalism are defined. (You will find this in the sum-
mary, sprinkled with other theses and themes of classical liberalism.)
And one of the participants, I no longer know which one, 15 proposes the
extremely significant expression “positive liberalism” as the name for
the neo-liberalism being formulated. Positive liberalism, then, is an
intervening liberalism. It is a liberalism about which Röpke, in the
Gesellschaftskrisis, which he published shortly after the Lippmann collo-
quium, says: “The free market requires an active and extremely vigilant
policy.” 16 In all the texts of the neo-liberals you find the theme that
government is active, vigilant, and intervening in a liberal regime, and
formulae that neither the classical liberalism of the nineteenth century
nor the contemporary American anarcho-capitalism could accept.
Eucken, for example, says: “The state is responsible for the result of
economic activity.” 17 Franz Böhm says: “The state must master economic
development.” 18 Miksch says: “In this liberal policy”—and here the
phrase is important—“there may be as many economic interventions as
in a policy of planning, but their nature is different.” 19 Well, I think this
problem of the nature of the interventions gives us a starting point for
approaching what is specific in neo-liberal policy. As you know, broadly
speaking the problem of the liberalism of the eighteenth century and
the start of the nineteenth century was to distinguish between actions
that must be taken and actions that must not be taken, between
domains in which one can intervene and domains in which one cannot
intervene. This was the distinction between the agenda and the non-
agenda. 20 This is a naive position in the eyes of the neo-liberals, for
whom the problem is not whether there are things that you cannot
touch and others that you are entitled to touch. The problem is how you
touch them. The problem is the way of doing things, the problem, if you
like, of governmental style.
I will take three examples to locate how the neo-liberals define the
style of governmental action. I will be schematic, brief, and stark, but
you will see that these are things with which you are certainly familiar,
since we are in fact immersed in them. I would just like to point out
schematically three things: first, the question of monopoly; second, the134
t h e b i rt h o f b i o p o l i t i c s
problem of what the neo-liberals call a conformable economic action
(action économique conforme); and third, the problem of social policy. Then,
on the basis of this, I will try to indicate some of what seem to me to be
specific features of this neo-liberalism which absolutely oppose them to
everything one generally thinks one is criticizing when one criticizes the
liberal policy of neo-liberalism.
First, then, I will take the question of monopolies. Once again, for-
give me, this is very banal, but I think we need to go back over this, at
least to bring some problems up to date. Let’s say that in the classical
conception, or one of the classical conceptions of the economy, monop-
oly is seen as a semi-natural, semi-necessary consequence of competition
in a capitalist regime, that is to say, competition cannot be left to
develop without monopolistic phenomena appearing at the same time,
which precisely have the effect of limiting, attenuating, and even nulli-
fying competition. Thus, a feature of the historico-economic logic of
competition would be for it to suppress itself, this implying, of course,
that any liberal who wants to assure the operation of free competition
must in fact intervene within the economy on those economic mecha-
nisms that facilitate, bring with them, and determine monopolistic phe-
nomena. That is to say, if you want to save competition from its own
effects, then there are times when you must act on economic mecha-
nisms. This is the paradox of monopoly for a liberal economics which
raises the problem of competition and at the same time accepts the idea
that monopoly is actually part of the logic of competition. Of course, as
you can imagine, the position of the neo-liberals will be completely dif-
ferent, and their problem will be to demonstrate that monopoly, the
monopolistic tendency is not in fact part of the economic and historical
logic of competition. Röpke, in the Gesellschaftskrisis, says that monopoly
is “a foreign body in the economic process” and does not develop within
it spontaneously. 21 To support this thesis, the neo-liberals deploy a num-
ber of arguments that I will pick out for you just for information.
First, there are arguments of an historical type, namely that monop-
oly, far from being a sort of ultimate, final phenomenon in the history
of the liberal economy, is an archaic phenomenon the source of which is
the intervention of public authorities in the economy. After all, if there
is monopoly it is because the public authorities, or those who at the14 February 1979
135
time assured the functions and exercise of public power, granted privi-
leges to corporations and workshops, it is because states and sovereigns
granted monopolies to individuals or families in exchange for financial
services in the form of a sort of derivative or concealed tax system. This
was the case, for example, with the monopoly granted to the Fugger
family by Maximilian I in exchange for financial services. 22 In short, the
development in the Middle Ages of a tax system that was itself a condi-
tion of the growth of centralized power brought about the creation of
monopolies. Monopoly is an archaic phenomenon and a phenomenon of
intervention.
There is also a juridical analysis of the conditions whereby the law
functioned to allow or facilitate monopoly. How were inheritance prac-
tices, the existence of a law of joint-stock companies, the problem of
patent rights, and so on, able to give rise to phenomena of monopoly,
not for economic reasons, but due to the functioning of law? Here the
neo-liberals raised a whole series of problems that are more historical
and institutional than specifically economic, but which opened the way
to very interesting research on the political-institutional framework of the
development of capitalism, and from which the American neo-liberals
benefited. The ideas of North 23 on the development of capitalism, for
example, are directly in line with this opening up made by the neo-
liberals, the problematic of which appears clearly in several contribu-
tions to the Lippmann colloquium.
Another argument to show that the monopolistic phenomenon does
not belong in principle or logically to the economics of competition is
found in political analyses of the link between the existence of a national
economy, protectionist customs barriers, and monopoly. Von Mises, for
example, analyzed this a number of times. 24 He shows how monopolistic
phenomena are facilitated by division into national markets which, by
reducing economic units to relatively small dimensions, effectively allow
the existence, within this framework, of monopoly phenomena which
would not remain in a world economy. 25 More positively and directly he
shows how protectionism, in fact decided on by a state, can only be effec-
tive inasmuch as you create or call for the existence of cartels or monop-
olies which are capable of controlling production, foreign sales, price
levels, and so on. 26 This was, broadly speaking, Bismarck’s policy.136
t h e b i rt h o f b i o p o l i t i c s
Third, economically, the neo-liberals say that classical analysis is true
when it says that in capitalism the necessary increase in fixed capital is
an undeniable support for the tendency towards concentration and
monopoly. However, they say, in the first place this tendency does not
necessarily and inevitably result in monopoly. There is, of course, an
optimum level of concentration around which the capitalist regime
tends to balance, but between this optimum of concentration and the
maximum represented by the fact of monopoly there is a threshold that
cannot be crossed spontaneously as the direct effect of competition, as
the direct effect of economic processes. There must be what Rüstow calls
“predatory neo-feudalism” 27 which must also receive “the support of the
state, laws, courts, and public opinion” in order to pass from optimum
concentration to the maximum of monopoly. And then, Röpke says, in
any case, even if the phenomenon of monopoly exists, it is not in itself
stable. 28 That is to say, in the medium term, if not in the short term, in
the economic process there are always either modifications of productive
forces, or technical modifications, or massive increases in productivity,
or again the appearance of new markets. And all this means that the
evolution towards monopoly can only be one variable which functions
for a certain time among other variables which will be dominant at
other times. In its overall dynamic, the economy of competition includes
a series of variables in which the tendency to concentration is always
counter-balanced by other tendencies.
Finally—and it is still von Mises reasoning in this way 29 —what is it,
fundamentally, that is important, or rather disturbing about the phe-
nomenon of monopoly with regard to the functioning of the economy?
Is it the fact that there is only one producer? Absolutely not. Is it the
fact that there is only one enterprise with the right to sell? Absolutely
not. Monopoly has a disturbing effect inasmuch as it acts on prices, that
is to say, on the regulatory mechanism of the economy. Now we can very
well imagine, and it regularly happens in fact, that the monopoly price,
that is to say, a price which can rise without either a fall in sales or prof-
its, is not and cannot be applied by monopolies themselves, because as a
result of applying the monopoly price they are always exposed to the
appearance of competition which will take advantage of the existence of
these abusive prices in order to hit back at the monopoly. Consequently,14 February 1979
137
if a monopoly wishes to retain its monopolistic power it will have to
apply, not the monopoly price, but a price identical, or at any rate close
to the price of competition. That is to say it will act as if there were
competition. And then it will not disrupt the market, it will not disrupt
the price mechanism and the monopoly will not be important. The
structure that is so important and the determinant phenomenon in
competition is made to function by practicing this competitive “policy
of the as if,” 30 and to that extent it is basically not relevant whether or
not there is a monopoly.
All this merely situates how the neo-liberals want to pose the prob-
lem. In a way, they are freed from this problem of the handicap of
monopoly. They can say: You can see that there is no need to intervene
directly in the economic process, since the economic process, as the
bearer in itself of a regulatory structure in the form of competition, will
never go wrong if it is allowed to function fully. What constitutes the
specific property of competition is the formal rigor of its process. But
what guarantees that this formal process will not go wrong is that in
reality, if one lets it function, nothing will come from competition, from
the economic process itself, that is of such a nature that it will change
the course of this process. Consequently, non-intervention is necessary
at this level. Non-intervention is necessary on condition, of course, that
an institutional framework is established to prevent either individuals
or public authorities intervening to create a monopoly. And thus you
find an enormous anti-monopolistic institutional framework in German
legislation, the function of which is not at all to intervene in the eco-
nomic field to prevent the economy itself from producing the monopoly,
but whose function is to prevent external processes from intervening
and creating monopolistic phenomena.*
The second important point in this neo-liberal program is the
question of conformable actions (actions conformes). 31 This theory of con-
formable actions, this programming of conformable actions, is essen-
tially found in a text which was actually one of the great charters of
* Foucault here leaves out pages 8–10 of the manuscript devoted to the German anti-cartel
legislation of 1957.138
t h e b i rt h o f b i o p o l i t i c s
contemporary German policy. It is a posthumous text by Eucken which
appeared in 1951 or 1952, called Grundsätze der Wirtschaftspolitik (the
foundations of economic policy) 32 and which is, as it were, the other,
practical side of the text called Grundlagen der Nationalökonomie published
a dozen years earlier, which was the theoretical side. 33 In this Foundations,
these Fundamental principles of economic policy, Eucken tells us that liberal
government, which must be perpetually vigilant and active, must inter-
vene in two ways: first, through regulatory actions (actions régulatrices)
and second, through organizing actions (actions ordonnatrices). 34
Regulatory actions first of all. We should not forget that Eucken is the
son of Eucken, the neo-Kantian Nobel prize-winner of the beginning of
the twentieth century. 35 * As a good Kantian, Eucken says: How should
government intervene? It should intervene in the form of regulatory
actions, that is to say, it must intervene in fact on economic processes
when intervention is imperative for conjunctural reasons. “The eco-
nomic process always leads to temporary frictions, to modifications
which risk giving rise to exceptional situations with difficulties of adap-
tation and more or less serious repercussions on some groups.” 36 It is
necessary then, he says, not to intervene on the mechanisms of the mar-
ket economy, but on the conditions of the market. 37 Rigorously follow-
ing the Kantian idea of regulation, intervening on the conditions of the
market would mean identifying, accepting, and giving free play to the
three typical and fundamental tendencies in the market, but in order to
encourage these tendencies and somehow push them to their limit and
full reality. These three tendencies are: the tendency to the reduction of
costs, the tendency to the reduction of the profit of the enterprise, and
finally, the provisional, localized tendency to increased profit, either
through a decisive and massive reduction of prices, or by an improve-
ment in production. 38 These are the three tendencies that regulation of
the market, that regulatory action must take into account, inasmuch as
they are themselves tendencies of the regulation of the market.
In clear terms this means first of all that the main objective of regu-
latory action will necessarily be price stability, understood not as fixed
* A short partially audible sentence follows: Neo-Kantianism ( ... ) literature.14 February 1979
139
prices but as control of inflation. Consequently all other objectives apart
from price stability can only be secondary and, so to speak, adjuncts. At
any rate, they can never be the primary objective. In particular, the
primary objectives must not be the maintenance purchasing power, the
maintenance of full employment, or even balancing the balance of
payments.
Second, what does this mean for the instruments to be used? It
means first of all using the policy of credit, that is to say, establishing the
discount rate. It means using foreign trade by reducing the credit
balance when you want to contain the rise in foreign prices. Shifts in
taxation will also be employed, but always moderate ones, when seeking
to act on saving or investment. But none of the kind of instruments used
by planning will be resorted to, namely: price control, support for a par-
ticular sector of the market, systematic job creation, or public invest-
ment. All these forms of intervention must be rigorously banished and
replaced by the pure market instruments I have just mentioned. The
neo-liberal policy with regard to unemployment in particular is per-
fectly clear. Whatever the rate of unemployment, in a situation of unem-
ployment you absolutely must not intervene directly or in the first place
on the unemployment, as if full employment should be a political idea
and an economic principle to be saved at any cost. What is to be saved,
first of all and above all, is the stability of prices. Price stability will in
fact allow, subsequently no doubt, both the maintenance of purchasing
power and the existence of a higher level of employment than in an
unemployment crisis, but full employment is not an objective and it
may be that a reserve of unemployment is absolutely necessary for the
economy. As, I think it was Röpke said, what is an unemployed person?
He is not someone suffering from an economic disability; he is not a
social victim. He is a worker in transit. He is a worker in transit between
an unprofitable activity and a more profitable activity. 39 These then, are
the regulatory actions.
Organizing actions are more interesting, however, because they bring
us closer to the specific object. What are organizing actions? Well, [they
are] actions with the function of intervening on conditions of the mar-
ket, but on more fundamental, structural, and general conditions of the
market than those I have just been talking about. In fact, we should140
t h e b i rt h o f b i o p o l i t i c s
never forget the principle that the market is a general social and eco-
nomic regulator, but this does not mean it is a natural given to be found
at the very basis of society. Rather, it constitutes—forgive me for saying
it once again—a sort of fine and very reliable mechanism on condition
that it functions well and nothing disturbs it. Consequently, the main
and constant concern of governmental intervention, apart from these
conjunctural moments I have just spoken about, must be the conditions
of existence of the market, that is to say, what the ordoliberals call the
“framework.” 40
What is a framework policy? I think it will appear clearly if we con-
sider a text from Eucken’s Grundsätze, that is to say, from 1952, where he
takes up the problem of German agriculture, although he says the same
arguments apply to most of European agriculture. 41 Basically, he says,
agriculture has never been normally, fully, and exhaustively integrated
within the market economy. It has not been integrated within the mar-
ket economy because of protective customs that, throughout Europe,
have marked off, and cut out the spaces of European agriculture. These
protective customs were made indispensable both by technical differ-
ences and generally by the technical inadequacy of each country’s agri-
culture. These differences and inadequacies were entirely linked to an
over-population that made intervention, the insertion of technical
improvements, pointless and, in truth, undesirable. So, what must be
done if we want European agriculture to function within a market econ-
omy? The text is from 1952. We will have to act on facts that are not
directly economic facts, but which are conditioning facts for a possible
market economy. So on what will it be necessary to act? Not on prices,
and certainly not on a particular sector, ensuring support for a scarcely
profitable sector, since these are bad interventions. What will good
interventions act on? Well, on the framework. That is to say, first, on the
population. The agricultural population is too large, so it will have to be
reduced by interventions enabling population transfers, migration, and
so on. We will also have to intervene at the level of techniques, by
making implements available, by the technical improvement of elements
like fertilizers, etcetera, and also by the training and education given to
farmers, which will enable them to modify [agricultural] techniques.
Third, we will also modify the legal framework of farms, and in14 February 1979
141
particular the laws governing inheritance, governing tenant farms and
the location of estates, trying to find the means to get the legislation,
structures, and institutions of society to play a part through action in
agriculture, and so on. Fourth, as far as possible we will modify the allo-
cation of the soil and the extent, nature, and exploitation of the soil
available. Finally, if necessary, we will have to be able to intervene on the
climate. 42
You can see that none of these elements—population, technology,
training and education, the legal system, the availability of land, the
climate—are directly economic and they do not affect market mech-
anisms directly, but for Eucken they are conditions for agriculture to be
able to function as a market, for agriculture to be able to function within
a market. The idea was not, given the state of things, how can we find
the economic system that will be able to take account of the basic facts
peculiar to European agriculture? It was, given that economic-political
regulation can only take place through the market, how can we modify
these material, cultural, technical, and legal bases that are given in
Europe? How can we modify these facts, this framework so that the
market economy can come into play? You can see here something that I
will return to shortly, which is that to the same extent that governmen-
tal intervention must be light at the level of economic processes them-
selves, so must it be heavy when it is a matter of this set of technical,
scientific, legal, geographic, let’s say, broadly, social factors which now
increasingly become the object of governmental intervention. What is
more, you can see in passing that this 1952 text programs, even if in a
completely rough and ready way, what will become the Common
Agricultural Market of the next decade. The text is from 1952. The
Mansholt plan 43 is already in Eucken, or it is in part in Eucken, in 1952.
So there you are for conformable actions, for conjunctural actions and
organizing actions at the level of the framework. This is what they call
the organization of a market order, of an order of competition. 44 And
this is actually what European agricultural policy is: How to reconstruct
a competitive order that will regulate the economy?
The third aspect is social policy. Here again I will have to be allusive,
because for reasons of both time and competence I cannot go into details.
However, we should agree to a number of things that are, if you like,142
t h e b i rt h o f b i o p o l i t i c s
banal and boring, but which enable us to locate some important
elements. What is a social policy in a welfare economy, that is to say, in
the kind of economy programmed by Pigou 45 and then taken up in one
way or another by Keynesian economists, the New Deal, the Beveridge
plan, and by European post-war plans? A social policy is broadly
speaking a policy with the objective of everybody having relatively equal
access to consumer goods.
How is this social policy conceptualized in a welfare economy? First
of all, it is conceptualized as a counterweight to unrestrained economic
processes which it is reckoned will induce inequality and generally
destructive effects on society if left to themselves. So, the nature of social
policy should be a kind of counterpoint to economic processes. Second,
what should the major instrument of social policy be in a welfare econ-
omy? It should be socialization of some elements of consumption; the
appearance of a form of what is called socialized or collective consump-
tion: medical consumption, cultural consumption, etcetera. A second
instrument is the transfer of elements of income in the form of family
allowances [ ... *]. Finally, third, a social policy in a welfare economy is
acceptance of the principle that stronger growth should entail a more
active, intense, [and] generous social policy as a kind of reward and
compensation.
Ordoliberalism very quickly raised doubts about these three princi-
ples. In the first place, they say that if you really want to integrate social
policy into economic policy, and if you do not want social policy to be
destructive in relation to economic policy, then it cannot serve as a coun-
terweight and must not be defined as compensation for the effects of
economic processes. In particular, relative equalization, the evening out
of access to consumer goods cannot in any case be an objective. It cannot
be an objective in a system where economic regulation, that is to say, the
price mechanism, is not obtained through phenomena of equalization
but through a game of differentiations which is characteristic of every
mechanism of competition and which is established through fluctuations
that only perform their function and only produce their regulatory
* Some inaudible words follow, ending with: certain categories, etcetera.14 February 1979
143
effects on condition that they are left to work, and left to work through
differences. In broad terms, for regulations to take effect there must be
those who work and those who don’t, there must be big salaries and
small salaries, and also prices must rise and fall. Consequently, a social
policy with the objective of even a relative equalization, even a relative
evening out, can only be anti-economic. Social policy cannot have equal-
ity as its objective. On the contrary, it must let inequality function and,
I no longer recall who it was, I think it was Röpke, who said that people
complain of inequality, but what does it mean? “Inequality,” he said, “is
the same for all.” 46 This formula may seem enigmatic, but it can be
understood when we consider that for the ordoliberals the economic
game, along with the unequal effects it entails, is a kind of general regu-
lator of society that clearly everyone has to accept and abide by. So, there
is no equalization and, as a consequence and more precisely, no transfer
of income from some to others. [More particularly, a transfer of income
is dangerous when it is withdrawn from the part of income that gener-
ates saving and investment.]* This deduction would thus mean with-
drawing a part of income from investment and transferring it to
consumption. The only thing one can do is deduct from the highest
incomes a part that would in any case be devoted to consumption, or,
let’s say, to over-consumption, and transfer this part of over-consumption
to those who find themselves in a state of under-consumption due to
permanent disability or unforeseen events. But nothing more. So you
can see that social transfers are of a very limited character. Broadly
speaking it is not a matter of maintaining purchasing power but merely
of ensuring a vital minimum for those who, either permanently or tem-
porarily, would not be able to ensure their own existence. † It involves
only the marginal transfer from a maximum to a minimum; it is
absolutely not the establishment of or regulation around an average.
Second, the instrument of this social policy, if it can be called a social
policy, will not be the socialization of consumption and income. On the
* Manuscript, p. 16. There is an inaudible passage on the recording: [ ... ] from the part of
income a section that would normally be directed towards saving or investment.
†
The manuscript adds: “But as one cannot define it [the vital minimum], it will no doubt be
the subdivision of the transfers of possible consumption.”144
t h e b i rt h o f b i o p o l i t i c s
contrary, it can only be privatization. That is to say, society as a whole
will not be asked to guarantee individuals against risks, whether these
are individual risks, like illness or accidents, or collective risks, like
damage, for example; society will not be asked to guarantee individuals
against these risks. Society, or rather the economy, will merely be asked
to see to it that every individual has sufficient income to be able, either
directly and as an individual, or through the collective means of mutual
benefit organizations, to insure himself against existing risks, or the
risks of life, the inevitability of old age and death, on the basis of his
own private reserves. That is to say, social policy will have to be a policy
which, instead of transferring one part of income to another part, will
use as its instrument the most generalized capitalization possible for all
the social classes, the instrument of individual and mutual insurance,
and, in short, the instrument of private property. This is what the
Germans call an “individual social policy,” as opposed to a socialist
social policy. 47 It involves an individualization of social policy and indi-
vidualization through social policy, instead of collectivization and
socialization by and in social policy. In short, it does not involve pro-
viding individuals with a social cover for risks, but according everyone a
sort of economic space within which they can take on and confront risks.
This leads us to the conclusion that there is only one true and funda-
mental social policy: economic growth. The fundamental form of social
policy must not be something that works against economic policy and
compensates for it; social policy must not follow strong economic
growth by becoming more generous. Economic growth and only eco-
nomic growth should enable all individuals to achieve a level of income
that will allow them the individual insurance, access to private prop-
erty, and individual or familial capitalization with which to absorb
risks. This is what Müller-Armack, Chancellor Erhard’s counselor,
around 1952–1953, called “the social market economy,” 48 which is also
the name for German social policy. I add immediately that in fact this
drastic program of social policy defined by the neo-liberals was not and
could not be strictly applied in Germany for a whole range of reasons.
German social policy was ballasted by a wide range of elements, some of
which derived from Bismarckian state socialism, others from Keynesian
economics, and others from the Beveridge plans or European social14 February 1979
145
security plans, so that on this point the neo-liberals, the German
ordoliberals, could not fully recognize themselves in German policy.
However, I want to emphasize two points. First of all, it was starting
from this and from the rejection of this social policy that American
anarcho-capitalism developed, and second, it is also important to see
that, in spite of everything, social policy increasingly tends to follow
this program, at least in those countries increasingly aligned with neo-
liberalism. The idea of a privatization of insurance mechanisms, and the
idea at any rate that it is up to the individual [to protect himself against
risks] through all the reserves he has at his disposal, either simply as an
individual, or through mutual benefit organizations and suchlike, is the
objective you can see at work in the neo-liberal policies currently being
pursued in France. 49 This is the tendency: privatized social policy.
Forgive me for being so prolix and banal on all this history, but I
think it was important in order to bring out now a number of things
that seem to me [to form] the, how to put it, original armature of neo-
liberalism. The first point to underline is that, as you can see, and as the
neo-liberals have always said, neo-liberal governmental intervention is
no less dense, frequent, active, and continuous than in any other system.
But what is important is to see what the point of application of these
governmental interventions is now. Since this is a liberal regime, it is
understood that government must not intervene on effects of the market.
Nor must neo-liberalism, or neo-liberal government, correct the destruc-
tive effects of the market on society, and it is this that differentiates it
from, let’s say, welfare or suchlike policies that we have seen [from the
twenties to the sixties].* Government must not form a counterpoint or
a screen, as it were, between society and economic processes. It has to
intervene on society as such, in its fabric and depth. Basically, it has to
intervene on society so that competitive mechanisms can play a regula-
tory role at every moment and every point in society and by intervening
in this way its objective will become possible, that is to say, a general
regulation of society by the market. So this will not be the kind of
economic government imagined by the physiocrats, 50 that is to say, a
* M.F.: in the years 1920–1960146
t h e b i rt h o f b i o p o l i t i c s
government which only has to recognize and observe economic laws; it is
not an economic government, it is a government of society. What’s more,
one of the participants in the Lippmann colloquium, who, in 1939, was
looking for this new definition of liberalism, said: Could we not call it a
“sociological liberalism”? 51 In any case, it is a government of society; what
the neo-liberals want to construct is a policy of society. Moreover, Müller-
Armack gave Erhard’s policy the significant term of Gesellschaftspolitik: 52 a
policy of society. The words mean however what they [say],* and the
trajectory of the words actually indicates the processes that they can. In
1969–1970, Chaban presented his economic and social policy as a pro-
ject of society, that is to say, he quite clearly identifies society as the tar-
get and objective of governmental practice. 53 At this point we pass from
a, broadly speaking, Keynesian type of system, which had more or less
lingered on in Gaullist policy, to a new art of government, which will be
taken up by Giscard. 54 This is the point of fracture: the object of gov-
ernmental action is what the Germans call “die soziale Umwelt ”: 55 the
social environment.
So, what does this sociological government want to do in relation to
this society that has now become the object of governmental interven-
tion and practice? It wants, of course, to make the market possible. To
play the role of general regulator, of principle of political rationality, the
market must be possible. But what does it mean to introduce market
regulation as regulatory principle of society? Does it mean establishing
a market society, that is to say, a society of commodities, of consumption,
in which exchange value will be at the same time the general measure
and criterion of the elements, the principle of communication between
individuals, and the principle of the circulation of things? In other
words, does this neo-liberal art of government involve normalizing and
disciplining society on the basis of the market value and form? Does this
not return us to the model of mass society, of the society of consump-
tion, of commodities, the spectacle, simulacra, and speed that Sombart
defined for the first time in 1903? 56 I don’t think so in fact. It is not
market society that is at stake in this new art of government; it is not a
* M.F.: mean (veulent dire).14 February 1979
147
question of reconstructing that kind of society. The society regulated by
reference to the market that the neo-liberals are thinking about is a
society in which the regulatory principle should not be so much the
exchange of commodities as the mechanisms of competition. It is these
mechanisms that should have the greatest possible surface and depth
and should also occupy the greatest possible volume in society. This
means that what is sought is not a society subject to the commodity-
effect, but a society subject to the dynamic of competition. Not a super-
market society, but an enterprise society. The homo œconomicus sought
after is not the man of exchange or man the consumer; he is the man of
enterprise and production. We find ourselves here at an important point
to which I will try to come back to next week. It is a point of intersec-
tion of a whole series of things.
First, of course, is the analysis of the enterprise that developed from
the nineteenth century: to a considerable extent the historical, eco-
nomic, and moral analysis of the nature of the enterprise, and the series
of works on the enterprise by Weber, 57 Sombart, 58 and Schumpeter 59
actually support the neo-liberal analysis or project. So, if there is some-
thing like a return in neo-liberal politics, it is certainly not a return to
the governmental practice of laissez-faire, and it is not a return to the
kind of market society that Marx denounced at the beginning of Book I
of Capital. There is an attempt to return to a sort of social ethic of the
enterprise, of which Weber, Sombart, and Schumpeter tried to write the
political, cultural, and economic history. More concretely, if you like, in
1950 Röpke wrote a text entitled The Orientation of German Economic
Policy, which was published with a preface by Adenauer. 60 What does
Röpke identify in this text, this charter, as the object, the final aim, the
ultimate objective of governmental action? I will list the objectives he
fixes: first, to enable as far as possible everyone to have access to private
property; second, the reduction of huge urban sprawls and the replace-
ment of large suburbs with a policy of medium-sized towns, the replace-
ment of the policy and economics of large housing blocks with a policy
and economics of private houses, the encouragement of small farms in
the countryside, and the development of what he calls non-proletarian
industries, that is to say, craft industries and small businesses; third,
decentralization of places of residence, production, and management,148
t h e b i rt h o f b i o p o l i t i c s
correction of the effects of specialization and the division of labor, and
the organic reconstruction of society on the basis of natural communi-
ties, families, and neighborhoods; finally, generally organizing, develop-
ing, and controlling possible effects of the environment arising either
from people living together or through the development of enterprises
and centers of production. Broadly speaking, Röpke says in 1950, it is a
question of “shifting the center of gravity of governmental action
downwards.” 61
You will recognize this text; it has been repeated 25,000 times for
the last 25 years. In fact, it currently constitutes the theme of govern-
mental action and it would certainly be false to see it as no more than a
cover, a justification and a screen behind which something else is going
on. At any rate, we should try to take it as it is given, that is to say, well
and truly as a program of rationalization, and of economic rationaliza-
tion. What does this involve? Well, when we look a bit more closely, we
may of course hear it as a kind of more or less Rousseauesque return to
nature, something that Rüstow called, moreover, with a very ambiguous
word, a “Vitalpolitik,” a politics of life. 62 But what is this Vitalpolitik that
Rüstow talks about, and of which this is an expression? Actually, as you
can see, it is not a matter of constructing a social fabric in which the
individual would be in direct contact with nature, but of constructing a
social fabric in which precisely the basic units would have the form of
the enterprise, for what is private property if not an enterprise? What
is a house if not an enterprise? What is the management of these small
neighborhood communities [ ... *] if not other forms of enterprise? In
other words, what is involved is the generalization of forms of “enter-
prise” by diffusing and multiplying them as much as possible, enter-
prises which must not be focused on the form of big national or
international enterprises or the type of big enterprises of a state. I think
this multiplication of the “enterprise” form within the social body is
what is at stake in neo-liberal policy. It is a matter of making the mar-
ket, competition, and so the enterprise, into what could be called the
formative power of society.
* Two or three inaudible words.14 February 1979
149
To that extent, you can see that we are at the crossroads where a
number of old themes are revived concerning family life, co-ownership,
and a whole range of recurrent themes criticizing market society and
standardization through consumption. And it is in this sense that we
see a convergence—without this being anything like a recuperation, a
word which has no meaning strictly speaking—between the Sombartian
style of criticism of around 1900 against standardizing market society,
etcetera, and the objectives of current governmental policy. They actually
want the same thing. Quite simply, those who denounce a “Sombartian”
society, in inverted commas, I mean that standardizing, mass society of
consumption and spectacle, etcetera, are mistaken when they think they
are criticizing the current objective of governmental policy. They are
criticizing something else. They are criticizing something that was cer-
tainly on the explicit or implicit horizon, willed or not, of the arts of
government [from the twenties to the sixties].* But we have gone
beyond that stage. We are no longer there. The art of government pro-
grammed by the ordoliberals around the 1930s, and which has now
become the program of most governments in capitalist countries,
absolutely does not seek the constitution of that type of society. It
involves, on the contrary, obtaining a society that is not orientated
towards the commodity and the uniformity of the commodity, but
towards the multiplicity and differentiation of enterprises.
That is the first thing I wanted to say. The second—but I really don’t
think I have time now—the second consequence of this liberal art of gov-
ernment is profound changes in the system of law and the juridical insti-
tution. For in fact there is a privileged connection between a society
orientated towards the form of the enterprise [ ... † ] and a society in which
the most important public service is the judicial institution. The more you
multiply enterprises, the more you multiply the centers of formation of
something like an enterprise, and the more you force governmental action
to let these enterprises operate, then of course the more you multiply
the surfaces of friction between each of these enterprises, the more you
multiply opportunities for disputes, and the more you multiply the
* M.F.: 1920–1960
†
Some words that are difficult to hear: at once (made denser?) and (multiplied?)150
t h e b i rt h o f b i o p o l i t i c s
need for legal arbitration. An enterprise society and a judicial society, a
society orientated towards the enterprise and a society framed by a mul-
tiplicity of judicial institutions, are two faces of a single phenomenon.
This is something of what I would like to stress next week in
developing other consequences, other formations in the neo-liberal art
of government.*
* Foucault adds:
Ah yes, wait, I have something else to tell you, I’m sorry. The seminar will begin Monday the
26th. Those of you who come know that this seminar always creates problems. A seminar is
usually something where you could work with 10, 20 or 30 people. Its nature, and consequently
its object and form change when there are 80 or 100 people. So I would have a little indication
to make, that is for those who do not really feel directly involved, that if they would be so
kind ... good. Second, the main question in the seminar will be the analysis of the transforma-
tions of juridical mechanisms and judicial institutions, and of legal thought, at the end of the
nineteenth century. However, I would like to devote the first seminar to some problems of
method and possibly some discussion on the things I am talking about in the lectures. So what
I would suggest, for those, but only for those who have some time and who it interests, etcetera,
that if they want to ask me some questions that they write them for me here during the week.
I will get the letters then next Wednesday and on Monday 26th I will try to answer those who
have asked me questions. And then the following Monday, at the seminar, we will talk about
themes in the history of law.14 February 1979
151
1. Alexander Isayevich Solzhenitsyn (born 1918), the Russian writer, author of a consider-
able body of work including, among the most well-known: One Day in the Life of Ivan
Denisovitch (1962), The First Circle (1968), Cancer Ward (1968), and The Gulag Archipelago
(1974). The publication of the latter (translation by Thomas P. Whitney,
New York/London: Harper and Row/Collins, 1974), an “experiment in literary investi-
gation,” devoted to a detailed description of the Soviet world of concentration camps,
earned its author arrest, deprivation of Soviet citizenship, and forced exile. It aroused a
wide debate in the West on the repressive nature of the Soviet system. See in particular,
A. Glucksmann, La Cuisinière et le Mangeur d’hommes. Essai sur les rapports entre l’État, le
marxisme et les camps de concentration (Paris: Le Seuil, 1975) to which Foucault refers in his
review of Glucksmann’s Maîtres penseurs (English translation as The Master Thinkers) in
1977: “The frightened scholars went back from Stalin to Marx, as to their tree.
Glucksmann had the effrontery to come back down to Solzhenitsyn”; “Le grande colère des
faits,” Dits et Écrits, 3, p. 278. In the first edition of Surveiller et Punir, in 1975, Foucault used
the expression “carceral archipelago” (p. 304; Discipline and Punish, p. 298) in homage to
Solzhenitsyn. See “Questions à M. Foucault sur la géographie” (1976), Dits et Écrits, 3,
p. 32; English translation by Colin Gordon, “Questions on Geography” in Michel
Foucault, Power/Knowledge. Selected Interviews and Other Writings 1972–1977, ed. Colin
Gordon, translations by Colin Gordon and others (Brighton: The Harvester Press, 1980),
p. 68. Solzhenitsyn’s name is evoked here as a metonym for the concentration camp world
and the Gulag.
2. Founded in 1894, in order to bring together books, pamphlets, and periodicals useful for
knowledge of the “social question,” the Musée social brings together collections covering
the social domain in the widest sense of the term. It is found at 5 rue Las Cases, Paris, in the
7th arondissement. This address was chosen as the registered office of the Centre d’études
created as a result of the colloquium (see below, this lecture, note 14).
3. Compte rendu des séances du colloque Walter Lippmann (26–30 août 1938), Travaux du Centre
international d’études pour la rénovation du libéralisme, vol. I, Preface by L. Rougier
(Paris: Librairie de Médicis, 1939). See P.-A. Kunz, L’Expérience néo-libérale allemande,
pp. 32–33.
4. On the initiative of Louis Rougier (see below, lecture of 21 February 1979, p. 161).
5. Walter Lippmann (1889–1974), An Enquiry into the Principles of the Good Society (Boston:
Little, Brown, 1937); French translation by G. Blumberg as, La Cité libre, preface by
A. Maurois (Paris: Librairie de Médicis, 1938). In an article published more than twenty
years after the colloquium, L. Rougier presented the book of the “great American colum-
nist” (for thirty years he wrote the column “Today and Tomorrow” in the Herald Tribune)
in the following way: “This work rejected the identification of liberalism with the physio-
crat and Manchester doctrine of laisser-faire, laisser-passer. He established that the market
economy was not the spontaneous result of a natural order, as the classical economists
thought, but that it was the result of a legal order postulating a legal interventionism of the
state”; L. Rougier, “Le libéralisme économique et politique,” Les Essais, 11, 1961, p. 47. See
the quotation from W. Lippmann used as an epigraph to the second volume of Karl
Popper’s, The Open Society and its Enemies, The High Tide of Prophecy (London: Routledge &
Kegan Paul, 1966): “To the débâcle of liberal science can be traced the moral schism of the
modern world which so tragically divides enlightened men.”
6. Louis Baudin (1887–1964): French economist, director of the series of “Great Economists,”
and author of La Monnaie. Ce que tout le monde devrait en savoir (Paris: Librairie de Médicis,
1938); La Monnaie et la Formation des prix (Paris: Sirey, 1947); Précis d’histoire des doctrines
économiques (Paris: F. Loviton, 1941) and L’Aube d’un nouveau libéralisme (Paris: M.-T. Génin,
1953).
7. The other French members of the colloquium, apart from those cited, were R. Auboin,
M. Bourgeois, A. Detœuf, B. Lavergne (author of Essor et Décadence du capitalisme [Paris:
Payot, 1938] and La Crise et ses remèdes [Paris: Librairie de Médicis, 1938]), E. Mantoux,
L. Marlio (author of Le Sort du capitalisme [Paris: Flammarion, 1938]), Mercier, and
A. Piatier. W. Eucken was invited but did not obtain permission to leave Germany.152
t h e b i rt h o f b i o p o l i t i c s
8. See above, lecture of 7 February 1979, notes 16 and 21.
9. See above, lecture of 31 January 1979, note 11. The translation of the book by von Mises, Le
Socialisme had just appeared in the Librairie de Médicis (publishers of W. Lippmann’s
book).
10. Jacques Rueff (1896–1978): student of the École polytechnique, Treasury auditor, director
of the Mouvement général des fonds (predecessor of the direction of the Treasury) at the
time of the Popular Front. A liberal economist, who established experimentally the link
between unemployment and the high cost of labor (the “Rueff law”), Rueff thought that a
system of stable and effective prices was the central element of a developed economy and
that in order to defend this economic policy had to combat its two main obstacles, the
absence of competition and inflation. Before the colloquium he published La Crise du capi-
talisme (Paris: Éditions de la “Revue Bleue,” 1935). His Épitre aux dirigistes (Paris:
Gallimard, 1949) takes up and develops some of the conclusions of the colloquium. His
main work is L’Ordre social (Paris: Librairie de Resueil Sirey, 1945). See his autobiography,
De l’aube au crépuscule (Paris: Plon, 1977). Foucault met him several times.
11. Robert Marjolin (1911–1986): French economist, general commissioner of the Monnet Plan
for Modernization and Equipment in 1947, then general secretary of the Organization for
European Economic Cooperation (OEEC) from 1948 until 1955. See his memoirs Le
Travail d’une vie, with collaboration of Ph. Bauchard, (Paris: R. Laffont, 1986).
12. Raymond Aron (1905–1983): philosopher and sociologist who after 1945, in the name of
his rejection of communism, had to assert himself as one of the most committed defenders
of liberal thought. At this time he had only published La Sociologie allemande contemporaine
(Paris: Félix Alcan, 1935), and his two theses, Introduction à la philosophie de l’histoire (Paris:
Gallimard, 1938) and La Philosophie critique de l’histoire (Paris: Vrin, 1938).
13. More exactly, 30 August 1938 (see the Colloque W. Lippmann, p. 107).
14. More exactly: Centre international d’études pour la rénovation du libéralism (the ini-
tials CIRL were adopted at the end of the colloquium (see p. 110), but the record of the
colloquium is published under the initials CRL). See the extract of the statutes pub-
lished in the record of the colloquium: “The object of research of the Centre International
d’Études pour la Rénovation du Libéralisme is to determine and make known how the fun-
damental principles of liberalism, and principally the price mechanism, by maintaining
a contractual regime of production and exchanges that do not exclude interventions aris-
ing from the duties of the state, in contrast with the directives of planned economies,
enable men to be assured of the maximum satisfaction of their needs and society to be
assured of the necessary conditions of its stability and duration.” The International
Center was inaugurated at the Musée social on 8 March 1939, with an address on neo-
liberalism from its president, Louis Marlio, member of the Institut, and a lecture by
Louis Rougier on “Le planisme économique, ses promesses. ses résultats.” These texts are
reproduced, with the stenographic records of several contributions from later sessions, in
the 12th number of the journal, Les Essais, 1961: Tendances modernes du libéralisme
économique.
15. It was L. Rougier, in Colloque W. Lippmann, p. 18: “It is only after having resolved these two
prior questions [(1) without state intervention, is the decline of liberalism inevitable as the
result of its laws of development? and (2) can economic liberalism satisfy the social
requirements of the masses?] that we will be able to tackle the specific tasks of what we
may call positive liberalism.” See also, L. Marlio, ibid. p. 102: “I am in agreement with
M. Rueff, but I would not like to use the expression ‘left liberalism’ [see J. Rueff, ibid.
p. 101: ‘(M. Lippmann’s text) establishes the bases of a policy that I, for my part, would
describe as left liberal politics, because it tends to give the greatest possible well-being to
the most deprived classes’] for this does not seem to me to be right and I think that there
is at present more or less the same views on the left and right. [ ... ] I would prefer us to
call this doctrine ‘positive liberalism,’ ‘social liberalism,’ or ‘neo-liberalism,’ but not the
word ‘left’ which suggests a political position.”
16. W. Röpke, The Social Crisis of Our Time, Part II, ch. 3, p. 228: “The freedom of the market in
particular necessitates a very watchful and active economic policy which at the same time
must also be fully aware of its goal and the resulting limits to its activity, so that it does not
transgress the boundaries which characterize a compatible form of intervention.”14 February 1979
153
17. Quoted, without reference, by F. Bilger, La Pensée économique libérale de l’Allemagne
contemporaine, p. 182.
18. F. Böhm, Die Ordnung der Wirtschaft als geschichtliche Aufgabe und rechgtsschöpferische Leistung
(Stuttgart-Berlin: Kohlhammer, 1937) p. 10: “The principal requirement of any economic
system worthy of the name is that political direction becomes mistress of the economy in its
totality as in its parts; the economic policy of the state must master the whole of economic
development both intellectually and materially” (translated and quoted by F. Bilger, La
Pensée économique libérale, p. 173).
19. Foucault apparently reproduces fairly freely here a phrase of Leonhard Miksch taken from
an article of 1949, “Die Geldschöpfung in der Gleichgewichtstheorie,” Ordo, II, 1949,
p. 327, quoted by F. Bilger, ibid. p. 188: “Even if the number of apparently necessary cor-
rective interventions should turn out to be so many such that from this point of view there
would no longer any quantitative difference with regard to the planners, the principle
expressed here would not lose its value.”
20. See above, lecture of 10 January 1979, p. 12.
21. W. Röpke, The Social Crisis of Our Time, Part II, ch. 3, p. 228: “Not only are monopolies
socially intolerable but they also interfere with the economic process and act as a brake on
productivity as a whole.”
22. See W. Röpke, ibid. p. 302: “ ... we must remember that in the great majority of cases it was
the State itself which through its legislative, administrative and judicial activities first cre-
ated conditions favorable to the formation of monopolies ... That the State acted as midwife
is quite clear in those cases where a monopoly was expressly granted by a special charter, a
procedure which is particularly characteristic of the early history of European monopolies.
Even then, however, the grant of monopolies appears to have been a sign of the State’s
weakness since the State in this way usually tried to free itself from debt, as for example
when in Germany Maximilian I granted monopolies to the Fuggers.”
23. Douglass Cecil North (born in 1920), The Rise of the Western World, in collaboration with
R.-P. Thomas (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1973); French translation by
J.-M. Denis, L’Essor du monde occidental: une nouvelle histoire économique (Paris: Flammarion,
1980). See H. Lepage, Demain le capitalisme (Paris: Librairie Générale Francaise, 1978;
republished “Pluriel”) p. 34 and chapters 3 and 4 (this book was one of the sources used
by Foucault in the last of these 1979 lectures).
24. See, Colloque W. Lippmann, pp. 36–37.
25. L. von Mises, ibid. p. 36: “Protectionism has divided up the economic system into a multi-
tude of distinct markets, and by reducing the extent of the economic units, has provoked
the creation of cartels.”
26. L. von Mises, ibid.: “Protectionism can only have effective results on a national market,
where production already exceeds demand, by the constitution of a cartel able to control
production, foreign sales, and prices.”
27. A. Rüstow, ibid. p. 41: “The tendency to exceed the economic optimum of concentration
clearly cannot be a tendency of an economic order, in the sense of the competitive system.
It is rather a predatory, neo-feudal, monopolizing tendency which cannot succeed without
the support of the state, laws, courts, magistrates, and public opinion.”
28. W. Röpke, The Social Crisis of Our Time, Part I, ch. 3, p. 136 sq; the author deploys a num-
ber of technical arguments against the thesis that “technical development ... manifestly
leads to ever larger industrial and commercial aggregates.”
29. Colloque W. Lippmann, p. 41.
30. On this policy of the “as if” (Als-ob Politik), theorized by one of Eucken’s disciples,
Leonhard Miksch, in his Wettbewerb als Aufgabe [Competition as duty] (Stuttgart-Berlin:
W. Kohlhammer, 1937, 2nd ed. 1947), which enables the ordoliberal program not to be con-
fused with the demand for a realization of perfect competition, see F. Bilger, La Pensée
économique libérale p. 82, p. 155, and the whole of chapter 3 of Part 2: “La politique
économique,” pp. 170–206; J. François-Poncet, La Politique économique de l’Allemagne
occidentale, p. 63.
31. On the distinction between “conformable” and “non-conformable” actions (“actions con-
formes” and “non-conformes”) see W. Röpke, Die Gesellschaftskrisis der Gegenwart (5th ed.
1948) pp. 258–264; The Social Crisis of Our Time, pp. 159–163; Civitas Humana, p. 29. See154
32.
33.
34.
35.
36.
37.
38.
39.
40.
t h e b i rt h o f b i o p o l i t i c s
F. Bilger, La Pensée économique libérale, pp. 190–192 (“static” conformity and “dynamic” con-
formity in relation to the model according to Röpke). [The notions “actions conformes” and
“non-comformes” are translated as “compatible” and “incompatible” interventions in The
Social Crisis of Our Time, but as “conformable” and “non-conformable” in Civitas Humana. I
have opted for the latter translation throughout; G.B.]
W. Eucken, Die Grundsätze der Wirtschaftspolitik (Bern-Tübingen: Francke & J.C.B. Mohr,
1952).
See above, lecture of 7 February 1979, note 9. See F. Bilger, La Pensée économique libérale,
p. 62: “Thus this book is like the exact opposite of the first; after political economy, eco-
nomic policy.”
This distinction is not formulated explicitly in the Grundsätze (on the Ordungspolitik, see
p. 242 sq). Foucault relies on F. Bilger, La Pensée économique libérale, pp. 174–188.
Rudolf Eucken (1846–1926): professor at the University of Basle in 1871, then at Jena, in
1874, where he taught until his retirement. He won the Nobel Prize for literature in 1908.
Among his main works are: Geistige Strömungen der Gegenwart (Berlin: Verleger, 1904);
French translation by H. Buriot and G.-H. Luquet, with a foreword by E. Boutroux, Les
Grands Courants de la pensée contemporaine (Paris: Alcan, 1912); English translation by
R. Eucken, Main Currents of Modern Thought (London: Unwin, 1912); Hauptprobleme der
Religionsphilosophie der Gegenwart (Berlin: Reuther und Reichard, 1907); French translation
by Ch. Rognard, Problèmes capitaux de la philosophie de la religion au temps présent (Lausanne:
Payot, 1910); Der Sinn und Wert des Lebens (Leipzig: Quelle & Meyer, 1908) French trans-
lation by M.-A. Hullet and A. Leicht, with a foreword by H. Bergson, Le Sens et la Valeur
de la vie (Paris: F. Alcan, 1912); English translation by Lucy Judge Gibson, The Meaning and
Value of Life (London: Adam & Charles Black, 1909). The description “neo-Kantian,”
taken no doubt from F. Bilger’s presentation in La Pensée économique libérale, pp. 41–42,
imperfectly defines his “philosophy of activity,” which is linked rather to the movement of
vitalist spiritualism, tinged with religiosity, that was then opposed to intellectualism and
scientism in Germany. See G. Campagnolo, “Les trois sources philosophiques de la réflex-
ion ordolibérale” in P. Commun, ed., L’Ordolibéralisme allemand, pp. 138–143. The link
Foucault suggests with neo-Kantianism no doubt refers to the Kantian distinction between
“constitutive principles” and “regulatory principles” in the Critique of Pure Reason, trans.
Norman Kemp Smith (London: Macmillan, 1978) 1st Division, Book 2, ch. 2, section 3
(“Analogies of Experience”) pp. 210–211.
The quotation is in fact from Röpke (as the manuscript indicates), The Social Crisis of Our
Time, Part II, ch. 2, p. 186: “In addition there is a no less important task [than working out
the program of the ‘third way’]. Within the legal and institutional permanent framework
the economic process will always produce certain frictions which are temporary by nature,
changes which will bring hardship to certain groups, states of emergency and difficulties of
adjustment.”
See W. Eucken, Grundsätze, Book V, ch. 19, p. 336: “Die wirtschaftspolitische Tätigkeit des
Staates sollte auf die Gestaltung der Ordnungsformen der Wirtschaft gerichtet sein, nicht
auf die Lenkung des Wirtschaftsprozesses.”
It is a matter here of the “restrictive definition of conformable intervention” according to
F. Böhm, “that which does not run counter to three fundamental ‘tendencies’ of the mar-
ket: the tendency to the reduction of costs, the tendency to the progressive reduction of
profits of the enterprise, and the provisional tendency to an increase of profits in the case
of a decisive reduction of costs and improvement in productivity” (F. Bilger, La Pensée
économique libérale, pp. 190–191).
The attribution of this phrase to Röpke seems mistaken. We can find no trace of it either in
the Lippmann colloquium or in Bilger’s work.
On this notion, see F. Bilger, La Pensée économique libérale, pp. 180–181: “To the same extent
that the ‘ordoliberals’ seek to restrict interventions in the process [object of regulatory
actions], so they are favorable to the extension of the state’s activity on the framework. For
the process functions more or less well according as the framework is more or less well
adapted. ( ... ) The framework is the specific domain of the state, the public domain, in
which it can fully exercise its ‘organizing (ordonnatrice)’ function. It contains all that does
not arise spontaneously in economic life: thus it contains realities which, in virtue of the14 February 1979
41.
42.
43.
44.
45.
46.
47.
48.
49.
155
general interdependence of social facts, determine economic life or conversely suffer its
effects: human beings and their needs, natural resources, the active and inactive population,
technical and scientific knowledge, the political and legal organization of society, intellec-
tual life, geographical data, social classes and groups, mental structures, and so forth.”
In the manuscript, Foucault refers here, following Bilger (La Pensée économique libérale,
p. 181), to W. Eucken, Grundsätze, pp. 377–378. However, the reference is inexact, and
Eucken does not deal specially with agricultural questions in this section of his work.
See Bilger, La Pensée économique libérale, p. 185: “Agriculture must be prepared for the free
market by seeing to it that all the measures taken lead it to this end and do not have imme-
diate harmful consequences on the other markets. To arrive at the final result, the state will
be able to intervene on the facts previously listed and determining agricultural activity: the
population occupied in agriculture, the technology employed, the legal framework of farms,
the soil available, even the climate, and so forth.” See also the quotation on p. 181, taken
from Eucken’s Grundsätze, p. 378: “There is no doubt a limit to the action of economic pol-
icy on global facts. But each of them can be influenced. Even the climate of a country can be
modified by human intervention (Selbst das Klima eines Landes kann durch menschliches
Eingreifen verändert werden). A fortiori other factors, like the size of the population, its
knowledge, and its capabilities, etcetera. The broadest field of action is offered by the sixth
fact, the legal and social order.”
Dutch politician, Sicco Leendert Mansholt (1908–1995), vice president (1967–1972), and
then President of the European Commission (1972–1973), worked from 1946 on the con-
struction of the Benelux countries and then on the Common Market. He developed two
agricultural plans, the first in 1953, aiming to replace national policies with a common agri-
cultural policy, and the second in 1968, in which he proposed a program for the restructur-
ing of community agriculture (the “Mansholt plan”). See the Rapport de la Commission des
Communautés européenes (Plan Mansholt ... ) (Brussels: Secretary General of the EEC, 1968).
On this notion of “order of competition” (Wettbewerbsordnung), see W. Eucken, “Die
Wettbewerbsordnung und ihre Verwicklichung,” Ordo, vol. 2, 1949, and the 4th book, with
the same title, of the Grundsätze, pp. 151–190.
Arthur Cecil Pigou (1877–1959), British economist who opposed a welfare economy,
defined by the maximum increase in individual satisfactions, to a wealth economy. He was
the author of Welfare and Wealth (London: Macmillan and Co., 1912), which was pro-
foundly revised in a 1920 re-publication under the title The Economics of Welfare (London:
Macmillan). See K. Pribram, A History of Economic Reasoning (Baltimore, Md.: Johns
Hopkins University Press, 1983): “Conceived of as a ‘realistic’ positive theory, economic
welfare was to be studied in terms of quantities of values and their distribution. In a more
or less axiomatic manner, Pigou assumed that—with the exception of some special
circumstances—welfare was increased when the volume of aggregate real income was
enlarged, the steadiness of its flow better assured, the dissatisfaction caused by its produc-
tion reduced, and the distribution of the national dividend changed in favor of the poor.”
The attribution of this formula remains uncertain and is not found in any of the writings
by Röpke consulted by Foucault.
See F. Bilger, La Pensée économique libérale, p. 198: “The ‘ordoliberals’ do not consider it less
‘social’ to put forward an individualist rather than a socialist social policy.”
See A. Müller-Armack, “Soziale Marktwirtschaft,” in E. von Beckerath and others,
Handwörterbuch der Sozialwissenschaften, vol. 9, (Stuttgart-Tübingen-Göttingen: G. Fischer,
J.C.B. Mohr, Vandenhoeck & Ruprecht, 1956); republished in A. Müller-Armack,
Wirtschaftsordnung und Wirtschaftspolitik; English translation, “The meaning of the social mar-
ket economy” in A. Peacock and H. Willgerodt, Germany’s Social Market Economy, pp. 82–86.
Müller-Armack uses the term for the first time in 1947 in a report to the Chambers of
Industry and Commerce of Nordrhein-Westfalen (reprinted in his book, Genealogie der
sozialen Marktwirtschaft [Berne: Paul Haupt, 1974] pp. 59–65). It really enters into circula-
tion after being included in the program of the Christian Democratic Union for the first
election campaigns for the Bundestag (Düsseldorfer Leitsätze über Wirtschaftspolitik,
Sozialpolitik und Wohnungsbau of 15 July 1949).
On neo-liberal policies undertaken in France in the seventies, see below, lecture of 7 March
1979.156
t h e b i rt h o f b i o p o l i t i c s
50. On the physiocratic concept of “economic government,” see Sécurité, Territoire, Population;
Security, Territory, Population, lecture of 25 January 1978, note 40, and lecture of 1 February
1978, note 23.
51. This expression is not found in the proceedings of the Colloque W. Lippmann (Foucault pos-
sibly confuses it with the expression used by L. Marlio on p. 102 (“social liberalism,” see
above, this lecture, note 15). On the other hand, it is used by W. Röpke in Civitas Humana,
p. 36: “This primary Liberalism might be described as sociological. The arms forged for the
attack on the old purely economic form are blunted in the face of the new.”
52. See F. Bilger, La Pensée économique libérale, p. 111 (which does not identify the source). The
term Gesellschaftspolitik seems only to appear in Müller-Armack’s work from 1960. See,
“Die zweite Phase der socialen Marktwirtschaft. Ihre Ergänzung durch das Leitbild einer
neuren Gesellschaftspolitik,” 1960 (republished in A. Müller-Armack, Wirtschaftsordnung
und Wirtschaftspolitik, pp. 267–291, and in W. Stützel and others, eds., Grundtexte der socialen
Marktwirtschaft pp. 63–78), and, “Das gesellschaftspolitische Leitbild de socialen
Marktwirtschaft,” 1962 (republished in Wirtschaftsordnung pp. 293–317). He defines then
the program, on the level of internal policy, of the second phase of the construction of the
social market economy.
53. Jacques Chaban-Delmas (1915–2000): Prime Minister under the presidency of Georges
Pompidou from 1969 to 1972. His project of a “new society,” presented in his inaugural
speech of 16 September 1969 and inspired by his two collaborators, Simon Nora and
Jacques Delors, provoked much resistance from the conservative side. Denouncing “the
weakness of our industry,” he notably declared: “But here the economy joins up with the
political and the social. In fact, the defective working of the state and the archaism of our
social structures are obstacles to the economic development we need. ( ... ) The new leaven
of youth, creativity, and invention which is shaking our old society can ferment new and
richer forms of democracy and participation in all the social bodies, as in a flexible, decen-
tralized state. We can therefore undertake the construction of a new society” [from:
www.assemblée-nat.fr].
54. Valéry Giscard d’Estaing (born 1926): elected President of the Republic in May 1974. See
below, lecture of 7 March 1979, p. 194 and note 20.
55. An expression of Müller-Armack, quoted by F. Bilger, La Pensée économique libérale, p. 111.
See, “Die zweite Phase der socialen Marktwirtschaft,” in W. Stützel and others, eds.,
Grundtexte der socialen Marktwirtschaft, p. 72.
56. The date given by Foucault is no doubt based on the references Sombart gives to his earlier
works in Le Socialisme allemand, French translation (see above, lecture of 7 February 1979,
note 42), 1990 edition, p. 48, note 1, concerning the destructive effects of the “economic
age” on “the men of our times” in the domain of “spiritual life”: “See my works: Deutsche
Volkswirtschaft (1903) [Die deutsche Volkswirtschaft im 19.Jahrhundert und im Anfang des
20.Jahrhundert (Berlin: G. Bondi)], Das Proletariat (1906), Der Bourgeois (1913) [Der
Bourgeois. Zur Geistesgeschichte des modernen Wirtschaftsmenschen (Munich-Leipzig: Duncker &
Humblot)], Händler und Helden (1915) [Händler und Helden. Patriotische Besinnungen
(Munich-Leipzig: Duncker & Humblot)].” See also, Der moderne Kapitalismus, Part 3,
ch. 53; L’Apogée du capitalisme, vol. 2, pp. 404–435: “The dehumanization of the enterprise.”
On the different characteristics of capitalist society described by Foucault, see in particu-
lar, Le Socialisme allemand, pp. 49–52 and p. 56.
57. See above, lecture of 7 February 1979, note 26.
58. See W. Sombart, Der moderne Kapitalismus, Part 1, ch. 1–2; L’Apogée du capitalisme, vol. 1,
pp. 24–41: “The role of the head of the capitalist enterprise” and “The new leaders”;
Gewerbewesen, 1: Organisation und Geschichte des Gewerbes, 2: Das Gewerbe im Zeitalter des
Hochkapitalismus (Leipzig: 1904; 2nd revised edition, Berlin: W. De Gruyter, 1929); and,
“Der kapitalistische Unternehemer,” Archiv für Sozialwissenschaft und Sozialpolitik, 29, 1909,
pp. 689–758.
59. Joseph A. Schumpeter (1883–1950): it is in his Theorie der wirtschaftlichen Entwicklung, pub-
lished in 1912 (republished Munich: Duncker & Humblot, 1934; English translation by
Redvers Opie, The Theory of Economic Development [New Brunswick N.J. and London:
Transaction Books, 1983]; French translation by J.-J. Anstett, La Théorie de l’évolution
économique [Paris: Librairie Dalloz, 1935] with a long introduction by F. Perroux, “The14 February 1979
157
economic thought of Joseph Schumpeter”), that the author of the monumental History of
Economic Analysis sets out for the first time his conception of the creator of enterprise who,
through his pioneer spirit and innovative capability, was the real agent of economic devel-
opment. See also his article, “Unternehmer” in, Handwörterbuch der Staatwissenschaften (Jena:
1928) vol. VIII. This theory of entrepreneurial boldness is the basis of the pessimistic find-
ing in 1942 in Capitalism, Socialism and Democracy (London: Unwin, 1987) (see in particu-
lar, pp. 131–134, “The Obsolescence of the Entrepreneurial Function”) in which he predicts
the coming of the planned economy. See below, lecture of 21 February 1979, pp. 176–178.
60. W. Röpke, Ist die deutsche Wirtschaftspolitik richtig? (see above, lecture of 7 February 1979,
note 20).
61. Ibid., and in W. Stützel and others, eds., Grundtexte zur sozialen Marktwirtschaft, p. 59. The
list of measured proposed by Röpke, however, do not correspond exactly to that given by
Foucault: “Die Maßnahmen, die hier ins Auge zu fassen sind [für eine grundsätzliche
Änderung sociologischer Grundlagen (Entmassung und Entroletarisierung)], betreffen
vor allem die Förderung der wirtschaftlichen und sozialen Dezentralisation im Sinne einer
die Gebote der Wirtschaftlichkeit beachtenden Streuung des kleinen und mittleren
Betriebes, der Bevölkerungsverteilung zwischen Stadt und Land und zwischen Industrie
und Landwirtschaft, einer Auflockerung der Großbetriebe und eiener Förderung des
Kleineigentums der Massen und sonstiger Umstände, die die Verwurzelung des heutigen
Großstadt- und Industrie-nomaden begünstigen. Es ist anzustreben, das Proletariat im
Sinne einer freien Klasse von Beziehern kurzfristigen Lohneinkommens zu beseitigen und
eine neue Klasse von Arbeiten zu schaffen, die durch Eigentum, Reserven, Einbettung in
Natur und Gemeinschaft, Mitverantwortung un ihren Sinn in sich selbst tragende Arbeit
zu vollwertigen Bürgen einer Gesellschaft freier Menschen werden.” See Civitas Humana,
p. 154: “decentralisation in the widest and most comprehensive sense of the word; to the
restoration of property; to a shifting of the social centre of gravity from above downwards;
to the organic building-up of society from natural and neighbourly communities in a closed
gradation starting with the family through parish and county to the nation; to a corrective
for exaggerations in organisation, in specialisation, and in division of labour ... ; to the
bringing back of all dimensions and proportions from the colossal to the humanly reason-
able; to the development of fresh non-proletarian types of industry, that is to say to forms
of industry adapted to peasants and craftsmen; to the natural furtherance of smaller units
of factories and undertakings ... ; to the breaking-up of monopolies of every kind and to
the struggle against concentrations of businesses and undertakings, where and whenever
possible; ... to a properly directed country-planning having as its aim a dencentralisation of
residence and production.”
62. Rüstow defined this Vitalpolitik thus: “ ... a policy of life, which is not essentially orientated
to increased earnings and reduced hours of work, like traditional social policy, but which
takes cognizance of the worker’s whole vital situation, his real, concrete situation, from
morning to night and from night to morning,” material and moral hygiene, the sense of
property, the sense of social integration, etcetera, being in his view as important as earnings
and hours of work (quoted by F. Bilger, La Pensée économique libérale, p. 106, which refers
only to “an article in Wirtschaft ohne Wunder,” which is no doubt “Soziale Marktwirtschaft als
Gegenprogramm gegen Kommunismus und Bolschewismus,” in A. Hunold, ed., Wirtschaft
ohne Wunder [Erlenbach-Zürich: E. Rentsch, 1953] pp. 97–108). See also, by the same author,
“Sozialpolitik oder Vitalpolitik,” Mitteilungen der Industrie- und Handelskammer zu Dortmund, 11,
November 1951, Dortmund, pp. 453–459; “Vitalpolitik gegen Vermassung,” in A. Hunold,
ed., Masse und Demokratie, Volkswirtschaftliche Studien für das Schweizer Institut für
Auslandsforschung (Erlenbach-Zürich: E. Rentsch, 1957) pp. 513–514. On the contrast between
Vitalpolitik and Sozialpolitik, see C.J. Friedrich, “The political thought of Neo-liberalism,”
pp. 513–514. It is A. Müller-Armack who connects the measures concerning the whole of
the environment (“die Gesamtheit der Umwelt”) with the Vitalpolitik: “Die hier erhobene
Forderung dürfte in etwa dem Wunsche nach einer Vitalpolitik im Sinne von Alexander
Rüstow entsprechen, einer Politik, die jenseits des Ökonomischen aud die Vitale Einheit
des Menschen gerichtet ist” (“Die zweite Phase der sozialen Marktwirtschaft” p. 71).This page intentionally left blankseven
21 February 1979
[ ]
Second aspect of the “policy of society” according to the
neo-liberals: the problem of law in a society regulated according to
the model of the competitive market economy. ⵑ Return to the
Walter Lippmann colloquium. ⵑ Reflections based on a text by
Louis Rougier. ⵑ (1) The idea of a juridical-economic order.
Reciprocity of relations between economic processes and institutional
framework. ⵑ Political stake: the problem of the survival of
capitalism. ⵑ Two complementary problems: the theory of
competition and the historical and sociological analysis of
capitalism. ⵑ (2) The question of legal interventionism. ⵑ
Historical reminder: the Rule of law (l’État de droit) in the
eighteenth century, in opposition to despotism and the police state.
Re-elaboration of the notion in the nineteenth century: the question
of arbitration between citizens and public authorities. The problem
of administrative courts. ⵑ The neo-liberal project: to introduce the
principles of the Rule of law into the economic order. ⵑ Rule of
law and planning according to Hayek. ⵑ (3) Growth of judicial
demand. ⵑ General conclusion: the specificity of the neo-liberal
art of government in Germany. Ordoliberalism faced with the
pessimism of Schumpeter.
LAST WEEK I TRIED to show you how ordoliberalism necessarily
entailed a Gesellschaftspolitik, as it was called, that is to say, a policy of
society and a social interventionism that is at the same time active,160
t h e b i rt h o f b i o p o l i t i c s
multiple, vigilant, and omnipresent. So, on the one hand there is a mar-
ket economy, and on the other an active, intense, and interventionist
social policy. But we should again carefully underline that this social
policy in ordoliberalism is not to function like a compensatory mecha-
nism for absorbing or nullifying the possible destructive effects of
economic freedom on society or the social fabric. In actual fact, if there
is a permanent and multiform social interventionism, it is not directed
against the market economy or against the tendency of the market econ-
omy. On the contrary, this interventionism is pursued as the historical
and social condition of possibility for a market economy, as the condition
enabling the formal mechanism of competition to function so that the
regulation the competitive market must ensure can take place correctly
without the negative effects that the absence of competition would pro-
duce. The Gesellschaftspolitik must not nullify the anti-social effects of
competition; it must nullify the possible anti-competitive mechanisms
of society, or at any rate anti-competitive mechanisms that could arise
within society.
This is what I tried to underline last week, and to give content to this
Gesellschaftspolitik I think the ordoliberals laid stress on two major axes.
On the one hand is the formalization of society on the model of the
enterprise, and I have pointed out the importance of this notion of
enterprise, and will return to it later. 1 A whole history could be written
of these economic, historical, and social notions of the entrepreneur and
the enterprise, with the derivation of one from the other from the end
of the nineteenth to the middle of the twentieth century. So, there is for-
malization of society on the model of the enterprise. On the other hand,
the second aspect, which I would like to talk about today, is the redef-
inition of the juridical institution and of the necessary rules of right in
a society regulated on the basis of and in terms of the competitive mar-
ket economy: the problem then, broadly speaking, of law.
To situate this a little, I would like to return to the Walter Lippmann
colloquium I spoke about one or two weeks ago, I no longer recall, 2
which was a fairly important event in the history of contemporary neo-
liberalism, since in 1939, right on the eve of the Second World War, we
see at this colloquium the intersection of old traditional liberalism, the
protagonists of German ordoliberalism, like Röpke, Rüstow, and so on,21 February 1979
161
and then people like Hayek and von Mises who will be intermediaries
between German ordoliberalism and American neo-liberalism which
gives rise to the anarcho-liberalism of the Chicago School, 3 Milton
Friedman, 4 etcetera. So, all these people—not Milton Friedman, but
Hayek and von Mises, who will be agents of transmission in a way—
came together in 1939. The colloquium was introduced and organized
by someone you know, Louis Rougier, 5 one of the rare and very good
post-war French epistemologists who is especially known in history for
having been the intermediary between Pétain and Churchill in the sum-
mer of 1940. 6 So Louis Rougier is the organizer of the Walter Lippmann
colloquium in the summer of 1939, in May or June I think. 7 He intro-
duces the whole of the colloquium and the different contributions, and
I think his introduction is quite remarkable with regard to the general
principles of this neo-liberalism. This is what he says concerning, pre-
cisely, the legal problem: “The liberal regime is not just the result of a
spontaneous natural order as the many authors of the Natural codes
declared in the eighteenth century; it is also the result of a legal order
that presupposes juridical intervention by the state. Economic life takes
place [in fact]* within a juridical framework which fixes the regime of
property, contracts, patents, bankruptcy, the status of professional asso-
ciations and commercial societies, the currency, and banking, none of
which are given by nature, like the laws of economic equilibrium, but
are contingent creations of legislation. There is then no reason to sup-
pose that the current, historically existing legal institutions are defini-
tively and permanently the best suited for safeguarding the freedom of
transactions. The question of the legal framework best suited to the sup-
plest, most efficient, and fair operation of the market has been neglected
by classical economists and deserves to be the object of an International
Center of Studies for the Renewal of Liberalism. To be liberal, therefore, is
not at all to be conservative, in the sense of the maintenance of de facto
privileges resulting from past legislation. On the contrary, it is to be
essentially progressive in the sense of a constant adaptation of the legal
order to scientific discoveries, to the progress of economic organization
* Words added by Foucault.162
t h e b i rt h o f b i o p o l i t i c s
and technique, to changes in the structure of society, and to the require-
ments of contemporary consciousness. Being liberal is not like the
‘Manchester’ attitude, allowing vehicles to circulate in any direction,
according to whim, with the consequence of endless congestion and
accidents; and it is not that of the ‘planners,’ fixing the hours of use and
routes to be followed for every vehicle: it means imposing a Highway
Code, while accepting that at a time of faster means of transport this
code will not necessarily be the same as in the time of stagecoaches.
Today we understand better than the great classics what a truly liberal
economy consists in. It is an economy subject to a double arbitration: the
spontaneous arbitration of consumers, who decide between the goods
and services they are offered on the market according to their preferences
through the plebiscite of prices, and [, on the other hand,]* the com-
mon arbitration of the state ensuring the freedom, honesty, and effi-
ciency of the market † .” 8
This text contains a number of elements. Straightaway we can put
aside some propositions that would clearly be unacceptable to the
ordoliberals; everything concerning the natural character of the mecha-
nisms of competition. When Rougier says that the liberal regime is not
only the result of a natural order but also the result of a legal order, the
ordoliberals would obviously say: “Not true, the natural order, what is
understood by the natural order, what the classical economists or, at any
rate, those of the eighteenth century understood by a natural order, is
nothing other than the effect of a particular legal order.” So we can leave
these elements at the turning point of classical liberalism and neo-
liberalism, or of this form of neo-liberalism, and move on to the more
important elements in this text, those specific to neo-liberalism.
First of all, I think we should note that for Rougier, as for the
ordoliberals moreover, the juridical is clearly not part of the superstruc-
ture. That is to say, they do not conceive of the juridical as being in a
relation of pure and simple expression or instrumentality to the econ-
omy. The economy does not purely and simply determine a juridical
* Words added by Foucault.
†
Rougier says: “of the markets.”21 February 1979
163
order that would both serve it and be constrained by it. The juridical
gives form to the economic, and the economic would not be what it is
without the juridical. What does this mean? I think we can identify
three levels of meaning. First, a theoretical meaning. You can see that the
theoretical meaning, I am embarrassed to point it out, is that instead of
distinguishing between an economic belonging to the infrastructure and
a juridical-political belonging to the superstructure, we should in real-
ity speak of an economic-juridical order. In this, Rougier, and then the
ordoliberals, place themselves strictly in line with Max Weber’s impor-
tant perspective. That is to say, like Max Weber, they situate themselves
from the outset at the level of the relations of production rather than at
the level of the forces of production. At that level they grasp in one hand,
as it were, both history and economics, both law and the economy
strictly speaking, and, placing themselves in this way at the level of the
relations of production they do not consider the economic to be a set of
processes to which a legal system is added which is more or less adapted
or more or less obsolete in relation to these processes. In actual fact, the
economic must be considered as a set of regulated activities from the
very beginning: it is a set of regulated activities with rules of completely
different levels, forms, origins, dates, and chronologies; rules which may
comprise a social habitus, a religious prescription, an ethics, a corpora-
tive regulation, and also a law. In any case, the economic is not a
mechanical or natural process that one can separate out, except by
abstraction a posteriori, by means of a formalizing abstraction. 9 The
economic can only ever be considered as a set of activities, which neces-
sarily means regulated activities. It is this economic-juridical ensemble,
this regulated set of activities that Eucken calls—in a perspective which
is more phenomenological than Weberian—the “system.” 10 What is the
system? It is a complex whole including economic processes the specif-
ically economic analysis of which is a matter for pure theory and a for-
malization which may take the form of the formalization of mechanisms
of competition, for example, but these economic processes only really
exist, in history, insofar as an institutional framework and positive rules
have provided them with their conditions of possibility. 11 This is what this
common analysis, this combined analysis of the relations of production
means historically.164
t h e b i rt h o f b i o p o l i t i c s
What does this mean, historically? It means that we should guard
against thinking that at a given moment there was the literal and simple
economic reality of capitalism, or of capital and the accumulation of cap-
ital, which with its own necessity would have come up against old rules
of right, like the right of primogeniture, for example, or ancient feudal
right, etcetera, and then created, in accordance with its own logic and
requirements and somehow by pressure from below, new and more
favorable rules of right, whether property rights, legislation on joint-
stock companies, patent law, and so on. This is not how we should view
things in fact. We should keep in mind that historically we are dealing
with a singular figure in which economic processes and institutional
framework call on each other, support each other, modify and shape
each other in ceaseless reciprocity. Capitalism was not a process from
below which comes up against the law of primogeniture, for example. In
fact, we can only understand the historical figure of capitalism if we con-
sider the role that was actually played by the rule of primogeniture, for
example, in its formation and genesis. The history of capitalism can only
be an economic-institutional history. And from this stemmed a whole
series of studies of economic history, of juridical-economic history,
which were very important in a theoretical debate, but also, and this is
what I want to come to, from a political point of view, because it is quite
clear that the problem and stake of this theoretical and historical analy-
sis of capitalism, and of the role played by the juridical institution, was
of course political.
What is this political stake? Well, it’s very simple. It is quite simply
the problem of the survival of capitalism, of the possibility and the field
of possibilities still open for capitalism. Because if we accept that in a
Marxist type of analysis, in the broadest sense of the term, it is the eco-
nomic logic of capital and its accumulation that is determinant in the
history of capitalism, then you can see that in fact there can only be one
capitalism since there is only one logic of capital. There can only be one
capitalism which is defined precisely by the single necessary logic of its
economy and regarding which all we can say is that this institution has
favored it and this other institution has impeded it. We have either a
flourishing capitalism or a shackled capitalism, but in any case we have
Capitalism (le capitalisme). The capitalism we know in the West is21 February 1979
165
capitalism tout court, merely modulated by favorable or unfavorable ele-
ments. And, as a further consequence, the current impasses of capitalism
are clearly historically definitive impasses insofar as they are ultimately,
in the last instance, determined by the logic of capital and its accumula-
tion. In other words, when you link all the historical figures of capital-
ism to the logic of capital and its accumulation, the end of capitalism is
revealed in the historical impasses it is currently manifesting.
If, on the other hand, what economists call “capital”* is actually only
a process which falls within the domain of pure economic theory and
which only has, and can only have historical reality within an economic-
institutional capitalism, then you can see that the historical capitalism
we know is not deducible as the only possible and necessary figure of the
logic of capital. In actual fact, historically, we have a capitalism with its
singularity, but which, in virtue of this very singularity, may give rise to
institutional and consequently economic transformations, to economic-
institutional transformations, which open up a field of possibilities for
it. In the first type of analysis, which refers entirely to the logic of capi-
tal and its accumulation, there is a single capitalism and so, before long,
no more capitalism at all. In the other possibility you have an historical
singularity of an economic-institutional figure before which a field of
possibilities opens up (if, at least, you take a bit of historical distance
and use a bit of economic, political, and institutional imagination). That
is to say, in this battle around the history of capitalism, around the his-
tory of the role of the institution of law, of the rule in capitalism, we are
actually dealing with a whole political stake.
We can consider this question in a different way if we look at how
things appear to the ordoliberals. On a fairly rough analysis, we can say
that their problem was to demonstrate that capitalism was still possible
and could survive if a new form was invented for it. If this was their final
objective, then we can say that basically they had to demonstrate two
things. First, they had to demonstrate that the specifically economic
logic of capitalism, the logic of the competitive market, was possible and
non-contradictory. I talked about their attempt to do this last week.
* In inverted commas in the manuscript (“le capital”).166
t h e b i rt h o f b i o p o l i t i c s
Then they had to show that this non-contradictory and so reliable eco-
nomic logic had a set of juridical-economic relations in the concrete, real,
historical forms of capitalism and that these were such that by inventing
a new institutional functioning it was possible to overcome the effects—
contradictions, impasses, irrationalities—which were typical of capital-
ist society but which, rather than being due to the logic of capitalism,
were simply the effects of a precise and particular figure of this
economic-juridical complex.
You can see, therefore, that in Germany these two great problems
which dominated economic theory, on the one hand, and economic his-
tory, or economic sociology, on the other, were completely bound up with
each other. One problem was the theory of competition. If the economists
of this time—Walras, 12 Marshall 13 in England, Wicksell 14 in Sweden, and all
those who followed them—attached so much importance to the theory of
competition, it was because it was a question of determining whether or
not the formal mechanism of the market was contradictory, and also the
extent to which the competitive market did or did not lead to phenomena
which were liable to nullify it, namely to monopoly. So there is this set of
problems, which are problems of economic theory if you like. And then
there’s the, let’s say, Weberian set of problems of economic history and
sociology, which are actually only the other aspect, the counterpart of the
first question, and which concern whether it really is possible to identify
an economic-institutional ensemble in the history of capitalism which can
account both for the singularity of capitalism and the impasses, contradic-
tions, difficulties, and mixtures of rationality and irrationality presently
being observed. Analyzing the history of the role of the protestant ethic
and of the religious prescriptions linked to it, 15 for example, and develop-
ing the pure theory of competition, were two different aspects, or two
complementary ways of posing and trying to resolve in a particular way
the problem of whether or not capitalism could survive. This is one aspect
of the questions, I think, and of Rougier’s text, of the propositions by
which he tries to show that economic process cannot be dissociated from
an institutional ensemble, from a juridical ensemble, which is not just its
more or less deferred or matching effect or expression, but which is really
united with it in an economic system, that is to say, roughly, in a set of
regulated economic practices.21 February 1979
167
The other aspect of the text that I have just read concerns what we
could call “legal interventionism,” which is the consequence of the first
aspect. If we accept that we are not dealing with an essential Capitalism
deriving from the logic of Capital, but rather with a singular capitalism
formed by an economic-institutional ensemble, then we must be able to
act on this ensemble and intervene in such a way as to invent a different
capitalism. We do not have to carry on with capitalism so much as invent
a new one. But where and by what route will this irruption of innova-
tion be able to take place within capitalism? Clearly innovation will not
come from the laws of the market, it will not take place in the market
itself since economic theory shows that, by definition, the market must
function in such a way that its pure mechanisms are in themselves regu-
lative of the whole. So we do not touch the laws of the market but act so
that institutions are such that these laws, and only these laws, really are
the principle of general economic regulation and, as a consequence, of
social regulation. The consequence of this is no economic intervention-
ism, or a minimum of economic interventionism, and maximum legal
interventionism. In what is, I think, a significant formula, Eucken says
that we must “move on to a conscious economic law.” 16 I think this for-
mula should be set term by term against the banal Marxist formulation
in which the economic is always that which escapes historians’ con-
sciousness when they are pursuing their analyses. For Eucken, the his-
torians’ unconscious is not the economic but the institutional; or rather,
the institutional is not so much the historians’ unconscious as the econ-
omists’ unconscious. What eludes economic theory and economists’
analyses is the institution, and we must move on to a level of conscious
economic law both by using historical analysis, which will show in what
respects and how the institution and rules of law exist in reciprocally
conditioning relationships with the economy, and then, thanks to this,
by becoming aware of the possible modifications to be introduced into
this economic-juridical complex. So the problem is this: By what route
will we be able to introduce the institutional corrections and innova-
tions which will permit an economically regulated social order to be
established on the market economy? How are we to arrive at what the
ordoliberals call the Wirtschaftsordnung, 17 or “the economic constitu-
tion”? The answer given by the ordoliberals—and I want now to focus168
t h e b i rt h o f b i o p o l i t i c s
on this—is to say, quite simply, that the institutional innovation we
must now adopt is the application to the economy of what is called the
Rechtsstaat in the German tradition and the Rule of law in English, or
l’État de droit in French. At this point the ordoliberal analysis no longer
follows the line of the economic theory of competition defined by
Walras, Wicksell, and Marshall, and the sociological history of the econ-
omy defined by Weber; it follows a line of legal theory, the theory of state
law (droit de l’État), which was very important in the history of both
German legal thought and German institutions.
I would like to say a couple of words about this. What do we under-
stand by Rechtsstaat, by this Rule of law (l’État de droit) which you have
no doubt heard so much talk about just by reading the newspapers over
the last year? 18 With regard to the Rule of law I think we need to begin
very schematically, so you will forgive the completely bald and sketchy
character of what I am going to say. This notion of the Rule of law, of
l’État de droit, appeared in German political and legal theory at the end
of the eighteenth and the beginning of the nineteenth century. 19 What is
the Rechtsstaat? Well, in this period it is defined in opposition to two
things.
First, it is defined in opposition to despotism understood as a system
that makes the particular or general will of the sovereign the principle
of the obligation of each and all with regard to the public authorities.
Despotism is that which identifies the obligatory character and form of
the injunctions of the public authority with the sovereign’s will.
Second, the Rule of law is also opposed to something different from
despotism, and this is the Polizeistaat, the police state. The police state is
different from despotism, although concretely they overlap, or aspects of
them overlap. What is understood by police state, by Polizeistaat? It is a
system in which there is no difference of kind, origin, validity, and
consequently of effect, between, on the one hand, the general and perma-
nent prescriptions of the public authorities—roughly, if you like, what
we will call the law—and, on the other hand, the conjunctural, tempo-
rary, local, and individual decisions of these same public authorities—if
you like, the level of rules and regulations. The police state establishes an
administrative continuum that, from the general law to the particular
measure, makes the public authorities and the injunctions they give one21 February 1979
169
and the same type of principle, according it one and the same type of
coercive value. Despotism, then, refers any injunction made by the pub-
lic authorities back to the sovereign’s will and to it alone, or, rather, it
makes it originate in this will. The police state, on the other hand, estab-
lishes a continuum between every possible form of injunction made by
the public authorities, whatever the origin of their coercive character.
The Rule of law represents an alternative position to both despotism
and the police state. This means, first, that the Rule of law is defined as
a state in which the actions of the public authorities will have no value
if they are not framed in laws that limit them in advance. The public
authorities act within the framework of the law and can only act within
the framework of the law. Therefore the principle and origin of the coer-
cive character of the public authorities is not the sovereign or his will; it
will be the form of the law. Where there is the form of the law, and in the
space defined by the form of the law, the public authorities may legiti-
mately become coercive. This is the first definition of the Rule of law, of
l’État de droit. Second, in the Rule of law there is a difference of kind,
effect, and origin between, on the one hand, laws, which are universally
valid general measures and in themselves acts of sovereignty, and, on the
other hand, particular decisions of the public authorities. In other
words, the Rule of law is a state in which legal dispositions, the expres-
sion of sovereignty, on the one hand, and administrative measures, on
the other, are distinguished in their principle, effects, and validity.
Broadly speaking, at the end of the eighteenth and the beginning of the
nineteenth century this theory of the public authorities and of the law
of public authorities organized what is called the theory of the Rule of
law, against the forms of power and public law that operated in the
eighteenth century.
This double theory or these two aspects of the Rule of law, one in
opposition to despotism and the other opposed to the police state, can
be found in a whole series of texts at the beginning of the nineteenth
century. The main text, and the first, I think, to produce the theory of
the Rule of law (l’État de [droit]*) is by Welcker, The Ultimate Principles
* M.F.: police170
t h e b i rt h o f b i o p o l i t i c s
of Law, the State, and Punishment, which appeared in 1813. 20 Jumping
ahead a bit, in the second half of the nineteenth century you find
another definition, or rather a more extensive working out of this
notion of the Rule of law. The Rule of law then appears as a state in
which every citizen has the concrete, institutionalized, and effective pos-
sibility of recourse against the public authorities. That is to say, the Rule
of law is not just a state that acts in accordance with the law and within
the framework of the law. It is a state in which there is a system of law,
that is to say, of laws, but it also means a system of judicial arbitration
between individuals and the public authorities. This is quite simply the
problem of administrative courts. So, in the second half of the nine-
teenth century you see in German theory and policy the development of
a whole series of discussions about whether the Rule of law means a
state in which citizens can and must have recourse against the public
authority through specialized administrative courts responsible pre-
cisely for this function of arbitration, or, alternatively, a state in which
citizens can have recourse against the public authority through the ordi-
nary courts. Some theorists, like Gneist 21 for example, reckon that the
administrative court, as the legal instance of arbitration between the
state and citizens, between the public authorities and citizens, is indis-
pensable for the constitution of the Rule of law. Others, like Bähr* 22 for
example, object that since an administrative court emanates from the
public authorities and is basically only one of its forms, it cannot be a
valid arbiter between the state and citizens, and that only justice, the
apparatus of ordinary justice inasmuch as it is really or supposedly inde-
pendent of the public authorities, can arbitrate between citizens and the
state. At any rate, this is the English thesis, and in all the English analy-
ses at the end of the nineteenth century 23 the Rule of law is clearly
defined as a state in which the state itself does not organize administra-
tive courts which arbitrate between citizens and the public authorities;
the Rule of law is a state in which citizens can appeal to ordinary justice
against the public authorities. The English say: If there are administra-
tive courts, then we are not living under the Rule of law. The proof for
* M.F.: von Bähr (manuscript: “v. Bähr”).21 February 1979
171
the English that the Rule of law does not exist in France is the existence
of administrative courts and the Council of State. 24 According to English
theory, the Council of State excludes the possibility of the existence of
the Rule of law. 25 This, in short, is the second definition of the Rule of
law: the possibility of judicial arbitration, by one or another institution,
between citizens and the public authorities.
This is the starting point for the liberals’ attempt at defining a way to
renew capitalism. The way will be to introduce the general principles of
the Rule of law into economic legislation. This idea of asserting the
principles of a Rule of law in the economy was, of course, a concrete way
of challenging the Hitlerite state, even though the Hitlerite state was
undoubtedly not the target in the first instance in this search for an eco-
nomic Rule of law. In truth, what was challenged, and was in fact chal-
lenged in Hitlerite practice was the whole of the people’s economic Rule
of law (tout l’État de droit économique du people),* precisely because the
state had ceased to be a legal subject in this state, the people, not the
state, being the origin of the law, and the state could only be the instru-
ment of the people’s will, which totally excluded the state from being a
legal subject in the sense of the source of law, or as a legal personality
which could be called before any kind of court. In actual fact, the search
for a Rule of law in the economic order was directed at something com-
pletely different. It was directed at all the forms of legal intervention in
the economic order that states, and democratic states even more than
others, were practicing at this time, namely the legal economic interven-
tion of the state in the American New Deal and, in the following years,
in the English type of planning. What does applying the principle of the
Rule of law in the economic order mean? Roughly, I think it means that
the state can make legal interventions in the economic order only if these
legal interventions take the form solely of the introduction of formal
principles. There can only be formal economic legislation. This is the
principle of the Rule of law in the economic order.
What does it mean to say that legal interventions have to be formal?
I think Hayek, in The Constitution of Liberty, 26 best defines what should
* Sic. The meaning of this expression is somewhat unclear.172
t h e b i rt h o f b i o p o l i t i c s
be understood by the application of the principles of l’État de droit, or of
the Rule of law,* in the economic order. Basically, Hayek says, it is very
simple. The Rule of law, or formal economic legislation, is quite simply
the opposite of a plan. 27 It is the opposite of planning. What is a plan?
An economic plan is something which has an aim: 28 the explicit pursuit
of growth, for example, or the attempt to develop a certain type of con-
sumption or a certain type of investment, or reducing the gap between
the earnings of different social classes. In short, a plan means the adop-
tion of precise and definite economic ends. Second, a plan always allows
for the possibility of introducing corrections, rectifications, the suspen-
sion of measures, or the adoption of alternative measures at the oppor-
tune moment depending on whether or not the sought-after effect is
obtained. Third, in a plan, the public authorities have a decision-making
role. They replace individuals as the source of decisions and conse-
quently force individuals into one thing or another, such as not exceed-
ing a given level of remuneration, for example. Or else they perform the
decision-making function by becoming an economic agent themselves,
by investing in public works, for example. So, in a plan, public author-
ities play the role of decision-maker. 29 Finally, a plan presupposes that
the public authorities can be a subject capable of mastering all the eco-
nomic processes. That is to say, the great state decision-maker is some-
one who has a clear awareness or who should have the clearest possible
awareness of all the economic processes. He is the universal subject of
knowledge in the order of the economy. 30 This is a plan.
Now, says Hayek, if we want the Rule of law to operate in the eco-
nomic order, it must be the complete opposite of this. That is to say, the
Rule of law will have the possibility of formulating certain measures of
a general kind, but these must remain completely formal and must never
pursue a particular end. It is not for the state to say that the gap between
earnings should be reduced. It is not for the state to say that it wants an
increase in a certain type of consumption. A law in the economic order
must remain strictly formal. It must tell people what they must and
must not do; it must not be inscribed within an overall economic choice.
* In English in the original; G.B.21 February 1979
173
Second, if a law is to respect the principles of the Rule of law in the
economic order, then it must be conceived a priori in the form of fixed
rules and must never be rectifiable by reference to the effects produced.
Third, it must define a framework within which economic agents can
freely make their decisions, inasmuch as, precisely, every agent knows
that the legal framework is fixed in its action and will not change.
Fourth, a formal law is a law which binds the state as much as it binds
others, and consequently it must be such that everyone knows how the
public authorities will behave. 31 Finally, and thereby, you can see that
this conception of the Rule of law in the economic order basically rules
out the existence of any universal subject of economic knowledge who
could have, as it were, a bird’s eye view of all of the economic processes,
define their ends, and take the place of this or that agent so as to take
this or that decision. In actual fact, the state must be blind to the eco-
nomic processes. It must not be expected to know everything concern-
ing the economy, or every phenomenon concerning the economy. 32 In
short, both for the state and for individuals, the economy must be a
game: a set of regulated activities—you can see that we have come back
to what we were saying at the start—but in which the rules are not deci-
sions which someone takes for others. It is a set of rules which determine
the way in which each must play a game whose outcome is not known
by anyone. The economy is a game and the legal institution which frames
the economy should be thought of as the rules of the game. The Rule of
law and l’État de droit formalize the action of government as a provider of
rules for an economic game in which the only players, the only real
agents, must be individuals, or let’s say, if you like, enterprises. The gen-
eral form taken by the institutional framework in a renewed capitalism
should be a game of enterprises regulated internally by a juridical-
institutional framework guaranteed by the state. It is a rule of the eco-
nomic game and not a purposeful economic-social control. Hayek
describes this definition of the Rule of law, or of l’État de droit in eco-
nomic matters in a very clear sentence. The plan, he says, is precisely the
opposite of l’État de droit or the Rule of law, “it shows how the resources
of society must be consciously directed in order to achieve a particular
end. The Rule of law, on the other hand, sets out the most rational
framework within which individuals engage in their activities in line174
t h e b i rt h o f b i o p o l i t i c s
with their personal plans.” 33 Or again, Polanyi, in his The Logic of Liberty,
writes: “The main function of a system of jurisdiction is to govern the
spontaneous order of economic life. The system of law must develop and
reinforce the rules according to which the competitive mechanism of
production and distribution operates.” 34 We have therefore a system of
laws as the rules of the game, and then a game which, through the spon-
taneity of its economic processes, displays a certain concrete order. Law
and order*: these two notions, [to which] I will try to return next week
and whose destiny in the thought of the American Right you are famil-
iar with, are not just slogans for a stubborn American extreme Right
born in the Midwest. 35 Law and order originally had a very precise mean-
ing which can be traced back well beyond the liberalism I am talking
about. † Law and order means that the state, the public authorities, will
only ever intervene in the economic order in the form of the law and, if
the public authorities really are limited to these legal interventions,
within this law an economic order will be able to emerge which will be
at the same time both the effect and principle of its own regulation.
This is the other aspect I wanted to stress with regard to the text
from Rougier I quoted. So, first of all, an essential Capitalism (le capi-
talisme), with its logic, contradictions, and impasses does not exist.
Second, it now becomes perfectly possible to invent or devise a capital-
ism different from the first, different from the capitalism we have
known, and whose essential principle would be a reorganization of the
institutional framework in terms of the Rule of law, and which would
consequently discard the whole system of administrative or legal inter-
ventionism which states have assumed the right to impose, be it in the
form of the nineteenth century protectionist economy or of the planned
economy of the twentieth century.
The third aspect is inevitably what could be called the growth of
judicial demand, because in fact this idea of law in the form of a rule of
the game imposed on players by the public authorities, but which is
only imposed on players who remain free in their game, implies of
course a revaluation of the juridical, but also a revaluation of the
* In English and French in original; G.B.
†
Foucault adds: since already in the nineteenth century ... [unfinished sentence]. In short21 February 1979
175
judicial. You know that one of the problems of liberalism in the
eighteenth century was the maximum reinforcement of a juridical
framework in the form of a general system of laws imposed on everyone
in the same way. But the idea of the primacy of law that was so impor-
tant in eighteenth century thought entailed as a result a reduction of the
judicial, or of the jurisprudential, inasmuch as the judicial institution
was in principle confined to the pure and simple application of the law.
Now, on the other hand, if it is true that the law must be no more than
the rules for a game in which each remains master regarding himself and
his part, then the judicial, instead of being reduced to the simple func-
tion of applying the law, acquires a new autonomy and importance.
Concretely, in this liberal society in which the true economic subject is
not the man of exchange, the consumer or producer, but the enterprise,
in this economic and social regime in which the enterprise is not just an
institution but a way of behaving in the economic field—in the form of
competition in terms of plans and projects, and with objectives, tactics,
and so forth—you can see that the more the law in this enterprise soci-
ety allows individuals the possibility of behaving as they wish in the
form of free enterprise, and the greater the development of multiple and
dynamic forms typical of this “enterprise” unit, then at the same time so
the number and size of the surfaces of friction between these different
units will increase and occasions of conflict and litigation multiply.
Whereas economic regulation takes place spontaneously, through the
formal properties of competition, the social regulation of conflicts,
irregularities of behavior, nuisance caused by some to others, and so
forth, calls for a judicial interventionism which has to operate as
arbitration within the framework of the rules of the game. If you multi-
ply enterprises, you multiply frictions, environmental effects, and con-
sequently, to the extent that you free economic subjects and allow them
to play their game, then at the same time the more you detach them
from their status as virtual functionaries of a plan, and you inevitably
multiply judges. The reduction of the number of functionaries, or
rather, the de-functionarization of the economic action of plans,
together with the increased dynamic of enterprises, produces the need
for an ever-increasing number of judicial instances, or anyway of
instances of arbitration.176
t h e b i rt h o f b i o p o l i t i c s
The problem—but this is a question of organization—of whether this
arbitration should be inserted within already existing judicial institu-
tions, or whether it is necessary to create new institutions, is one of the
fundamental problems in liberal societies where there is a multiplica-
tion of the judicial and instances of and the need for arbitration.
Solutions vary from one country to another. Next week I will try to talk
about this 36 with regard to France and problems which have arisen in
the present French judicial institution, the magistrates’ association, and
so on. 37 Anyway, with regard to this creation of an intensified and
increased judicial demand, I would just like to quote this text of Röpke,
who said: “It is now advisable, to make courts, more than in the past,
organs of the economy and to entrust to their decision tasks that were
previously entrusted to administrative authorities.” 38 In short, the more
the law becomes formal, the more numerous judicial interventions. And
to the extent that governmental interventions of the public authority are
more and more formalized, and to the extent that administrative inter-
vention recedes, then to the same extent justice tends to become, and
must become, an omnipresent public service.
I will stop there on this description of the ordoliberal program for-
mulated by the Germans from 1930 up until the foundation and devel-
opment of the modern German economy. However, I would like to take
a further thirty seconds, well, two minutes, to indicate—how can I put
it?—a possible way of reading these problems. So, ordoliberalism envi-
sions a competitive market economy accompanied by a social interven-
tionism that entails an institutional reform around the revaluation of
the “enterprise” unit as the basic economic agent. I do not think that
this is merely the pure and simple consequence and projection of the
current crisis of capitalism in ideology, economic theory, or political
choice. It seems to me that we are seeing the birth, maybe for a short
period or maybe for a longer period, of a new art of government, or at
any rate, of a renewal of the liberal art of government. I think we can
grasp the specificity of this art of government and its historical and
political stakes if we compare them with Schumpeter 39 (and I would
like to dwell on this for a few moments and then I will let you go).
Basically, all these economists, Schumpeter, Röpke, or Eucken, all start
(I have stressed this, and I come back to it) from the Weberian problem21 February 1979
177
of the rationality or irrationality of capitalist society. Schumpeter, like
the ordoliberals, and the ordoliberals like Weber, think that Marx, or at
any rate, Marxists, are wrong in looking for the exclusive and funda-
mental origin of this rationality/irrationality of capitalist society in the
contradictory logic of capital and its accumulation. Schumpeter and the
ordoliberals think that there is no internal contradiction in the logic of
capital and its accumulation and consequently that capitalism is per-
fectly viable from an economic and purely economic point of view. This,
in brief, is the set of theses shared by Schumpeter and the ordoliberals.
The differences begin at this point. For Schumpeter, if it is true that
capitalism is not at all contradictory [on the level of] the purely eco-
nomic process, and if, consequently, the economic in capitalism is always
viable, in actual fact, Schumpeter says, historically, concretely, capitalism
is inseperable from monopolistic tendencies. This is not due to the eco-
nomic process, but to the social consequences of the process of competi-
tion. That is to say, the very organization of competition, and the
dynamic of competition, will call for, and necessarily so, an increasingly
monopolistic organization. So the monopolistic phenomenon is, for
Schumpeter, a social phenomenon consequent upon the dynamic of
competition, but not inherent to the economic process of competition
itself. There is a tendency to centralization; there is a tendency to an
incorporation of the economy in increasingly closely connected decision-
making centers of the administration and the state. 40 This, then, is the
historical condemnation of capitalism. But it is not a condemnation in
terms of contradiction; it is condemnation in terms of historical
inevitability. For Schumpeter, capitalism cannot avoid this concentra-
tion; it cannot avoid a sort of transition to socialism being brought
about within its own development, since this, for Schumpeter, is what
defines socialism: “a system in which a central authority will be able to
control the means of production and production itself.” 41 So the transi-
tion to socialism is not inscribed in the historical necessity of capitalism
by virtue of an illogicality or irrationality specific to the capitalist econ-
omy, but due to the organizational and social necessity entailed by the
competitive market. So we will develop into socialism, with, of course, a
political price, which Schumpeter says is undoubtedly heavy, but not
one that it is absolutely impossible to pay. That is to say, the political178
t h e b i rt h o f b i o p o l i t i c s
price is not absolutely unbearable and is not impossible to correct, so
that we will advance towards socialist society with a political structure
which will obviously have to be strictly supervised and worked out so as
to avoid the political price of, broadly speaking, totalitarianism. 42
Totalitarianism can be avoided, but not without effort. We can say,
broadly speaking, that, for Schumpeter, it won’t be much fun, but it
will happen. It will come about and, if we take great care, it may not be
as bad as we might think.
With regard to Schumpeter’s analysis—both as an analysis of capital-
ism and as an historical-political prediction—with regard to this kind of
pessimism, or what we can call Schumpeter’s pessimism, the ordoliber-
als reply by, as it were, reassembling his analysis and saying that, first of
all, unlike Schumpeter, we should not think that the political price he
says we will have to pay, this loss of freedom, if you like, when we arrive
at a socialist regime, is acceptable. And why is it not acceptable? It is not
acceptable because it is not in fact just a matter of drawbacks which
accompany a planned economy. In actual fact, a planned economy cannot
avoid being politically costly; that is to say, it cannot avoid being paid
for with the loss of freedom. Consequently, there is no possible correc-
tion. No possible adjustment would be able to circumvent the loss of
freedom which is the necessary political consequence of planning. And
why is this complete loss of freedom inevitable with planning? Quite
simply, it is because planning involves a series of basic economic errors
and it will constantly have to make up for these errors; and you will
only be able to make up for the intrinsic error or irrationality of plan-
ning by the suppression of basic freedoms. Now, they say, how can we
avoid the error of planning? Precisely by seeing to it that the tendency
Schumpeter identifies in capitalism towards the organization, central-
ization, and absorption of the economic process within the state, which
he saw was not a tendency of the economic process but of its social con-
sequences, is corrected, and corrected precisely by social intervention. At
this point, social intervention, the Gesellschaftspolitik, legal intervention-
ism, the definition of a new institutional framework of the economy
protected by a strictly formal legislation like that of the Rechtsstaat or
the Rule of law, will make it possible to nullify and absorb the central-
izing tendencies which are in fact immanent to capitalist society and not21 February 1979
179
to the logic of capital. This is what will enable us to maintain the logic
of capital in its purity and get the strictly competitive market to work
without the risk of it ending up in the phenomena of monopoly, con-
centration, and centralization observable in modern society. As a result,
this is how we will be able to mutually adapt to each other, on the one
hand, a competitive type of economy, as defined or at least problema-
tized by the great theorists of the competitive economy, and, on the
other, an institutional practice whose importance was demonstrated in
the great works of historians or sociologists of the economy, like Weber.
Broadly speaking, according to the ordoliberals the present historical
chance of liberalism is defined by a combination of law, an institutional
field defined by the strictly formal character of interventions by the
public authorities, and the unfolding of an economy whose processes are
regulated by pure competition.
This analysis, political project, and historical wager of the ordoliber-
als has, I think, been very important, forming the framework of modern
German policy. And if there really is a German model, it is not the fre-
quently invoked model of the all-powerful state, of the police state,
which, as you know, has so frightened our compatriots. The German
model being diffused is not the police state; it is the Rule of law (l’État
de droit). And I have not made these analyses just for the pleasure of
engaging in a bit of contemporary history, but so as to try to show you
how it was possible for this German model to spread, on the one hand,
in contemporary French economic policy, and, on the other, in a number
of liberal problems, theories, and utopias like those we see developing in
the United States. So, next week I will talk about some aspects of
Giscard’s economic policy and then about American liberal utopians.*
* Foucault adds:
I will not give my lecture next Wednesday, simply for reasons of tiredness and so I can take a bit
of a breath. Forgive me. So, I will resume the lectures in two weeks’ time. The seminar next
Monday, but the lecture in two weeks’ time.180
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
11.
t h e b i rt h o f b i o p o l i t i c s
See above, this lecture, p. 175.
See above, lecture of 14 February 1979.
See below, lectures of 21 and 28 March 1979.
Milton Friedman (1912–2006): founder of the American neo-liberal movement, Nobel
Prize-winner for economics in 1976, became known at the end of the 1950s through his
rehabilitation of the quantitative theory of money (the so-called “monetarist” theory).
Partisan of an intransigent liberalism and the main inspirer of United States economic
policy from the 1970s (he was the economic advisor of Nixon and Reagan during their
candidatures for the Presidency), he is the author of a number of works, including
Capitalism and Freedom (Chicago: The University of Chicago Press, 1962) in which he
claims that the market mechanism is sufficient to regulate most of the economic and social
problems of our times. See, H. Lepage, Demain le capitalisme, pp. 373–412: “Milton Friedman
or the death of Keynes.”
Louis Rougier (1889–1982), the author notably of: La Matière et l’Énergie, suivant la théorie
de la relativité et la théorie des quanta (Paris: Gauthier-Villars, 1919); Les Paralogismes du
rationalisme. Essai sur la théorie de la connaissance (Paris: F. Alcan, 1920); La Philosophie
géométrique de Henri Poincaré (Paris: F. Alcan, 1920); La Structure des théories déductives
(Paris: F. Alcan, 1921); and La Matière et l’Énergie (Paris: Gauthier-Villars, 2nd edition,
1921). He was a representative of the Vienna Circle in Paris and was responsible for the
organization of the major international colloquium of scientific philosophy that took
place in Paris in 1935. On the economic level, he wrote La Mystique démocratique: ses
origines, ses illusions (Paris: Flammarion, 1929; republished Paris: Albatros, 1983, with a
Preface by A. de Benoist); La Mystique soviétique (Brussels: Équilibres, 1934), and had just
published Les Mystiques économiques (Paris: Librairie de Médicis, 1938) in which he pro-
posed to show “how liberal democracies turn into totalitarian regimes by ill-considered
social reforms and abusive interventions by public authorities, encouraged by theoreti-
cians of the planned economy,” the latter being the “new Mysticism that creates the intel-
lectual climate favorable to the establishment of dictatorships” (pp. 8–9). See, M. Allais,
Louis Rougier, prince de la pensée (Lyon: Fondation de Lourmarin, printed by Tixier et fils,
1990) bibliography pp. 55–71, and F. Denord, “Aux origines du néo-libéralisme en
France. Louis Rougier et le Colloque Walter Lippmann de 1938,” Le Mouvement social, 195,
April-June 2001, pp. 9–34.
On this controversial episode, see R.O. Paxton, Vichy France: Old guard and new order
1940–1944 (New York: A.A. Knopf, 1972): “The Franco-British negotiations at Madrid
from September 1940 to February 1941 between the two ambassadors—M. Robert de la
Baume followed by François Piétri, facing Sir Samuel Hoare—were the real link between
Vichy and London. Few aspects of Vichy policy have been more subject to postwar mysti-
fication than this. Two unofficial links, Professor Louis Rougier of the University of
Besançon and Jacques Chevalier, Vichy minister of education and then of health in
1940–41, claimed after the war to have negotiated secret Churchill-Pétain ‘accords.’
Although Professor Rougier did go to London in November 1940, the notations on his
document are not in the handwriting of Winston Churchill, as he claimed.” See also,
J. Lacouture, De Gaulle (Paris: Le Seuil, 1984) vol. 1, pp. 453–455.
The colloquium was held at the Institut international de coopération intellectuelle from
26 to 30 August 1938 (see above, lecture of 14 February, note 3).
Colloque W. Lippmann, pp. 16–17.
On “isolating abstraction,” as a condition of economic morphology according to Eucken,
distinct from the “generalizing abstraction” put to work by Weber in the formation of ideal
types, see F. Bilger, La Pensée économique libérale, p. 52.
See, F. Bilger, ibid., pp. 57–58.
See ibid., p. 58. “The basic idea of Walter Eucken, the idea that enabled him to resolve the
antinomy [between history and economic theory], is the distinction between the frame-
work, which is in history, and the process, which, in the expression of L. Miksch, is ‘non-
history.’ The process is an eternal recommencement that also has a time, an internal time as
it were. But the framework, the ensemble of facts, is subject to real, historical time, and
evolves in a certain direction.”21 February 1979
181
12. Léon Walras (1834–1910) was a student of the Paris École des mines and became a jour-
nalist and then professor of political economy at Lausanne from 1870. He was concerned to
reconcile free competition and social justice at the same time as Jevons (Theory of Political
Economy, 1871) and Menger (Grundsätze der Volkwirtschatslehre, 1871) but according to his
own axiomatic approach, and he developed a new theory of value based on the principle of
marginal utility (“marginalist revolution” of 1871–1874). He constructed a mathematical
model postulating the perfectly “rational” behavior of the set of agents, which should
enable the general equilibrium of prices and exchanges to be determined in a system of
pure competition. Main works: L’Économie politique et la Justice (Paris: Guillaumin, 1860);
Éléments d’économie politique pure, ou Théorie de la richesse sociale (Lausanne: 1874–1887);
English translation by William Jaffé, Elements of Pure Economics (London: George Allen &
Unwin, 1954); Théorie mathématique de la richesse sociale (Lausanne: 1883); Études d’économie
sociale (Lausanne-Paris, 1896) and, Études d’économie appliquée (Lausanne-Paris: 1898);
English translation by Jan van Daal, Studies in Applied Economics: Theory of the Production of
Social Wealth (London: Routledge, 2005).
13. Alfred Marshall (1842–1924): British economist, professor at Cambridge, and author of
famous textbook: Principles of Economy (London: Macmillan & Co., 1890). Seeking to
realize the synthesis of classical political economy and marginalism, he underlined the
importance of time as a crucial element in the functioning of the process of equilibrium
(distinction between short and long periods).
14. Johann Gustav Knut Wicksell (1851–1926): Swedish economist, professor at the University
of Lund. He tried to go beyond the Walrasian theory of general equilibrium in his work on
fluctuations of the average level of prices. He is the author of: Über Wert, Kapital und Rente
nach den neueren nationalökonomischen Theorien (Jena: G. Fischer, 1893); Geldzins und
Güterpreise (Jena: G. Fischer, 1898); Vorlesungen über Nationalökonomie auf Grundlage des
Marginalprinzips (Jena: G. Fischer, 1928). None of these works is translated into French. In
English see, translated by J.M. Buchanan, A New Principle of Just Taxation (The
International Economic Association, 1958); translated by E. Classen, Lectures on Political
Economy (London: George Routledge and Sons, 1934); translated by R.F. Kahn, Interest and
Prices (London: Macmillan, 1936); Selected Papers on Economic Theory (London: George
Allen & Unwin, 1958).
15. See above, lecture of 31 January 1979, note 25.
16. It seems that this expression is taken from the following phrase in F. Bilger, La Pensée
économique libérale, p. 65, with regard to the scientific politics recommended by Eucken on
the basis of his economic morphology: “ ... after having refuted evolutionist philosophy,
Eucken recalls that most groups in history are not formed from technical necessity, but
thanks to the absence of a real conscious economic law.”
17. On this notion of Wirtschaftsordnung, see W. Eucken, Die Grundlagen der Nationalökonomie,
pp. 57–58; The Foundations of Economics, pp. 83–85, [where it is translated as “‘economic
constitution’ ... the decision as to the general ordering of the economic life of a community”;
G.B.] See also the title of the book by Müller-Armack, Wirtschaftsordnung und
Wirtschaftspolitik.
18. Is this an allusion to the polemics provoked by the expulsion of Klaus Croissant, the
lawyer for the Baader group? On this event, which caused a considerable stir in France, see
Sécurité, Territoire, Population; Security, Territory, Population, lecture of 15 March 1978, note 28
(on Jean Genet), and the “Situation des cours,” ibid. (French) p. 385; “Course context,”
ibid. (English) p. 372. See, for example, the article by O. Wormser, French ambassador to
Bonn from 1974 to 1977, “Connaïtre avant de juger,” Le Monde, 5 November 1977: “What
did Andreas Baader and his friend want by kidnapping M. Schleyer? Above all, to
exchange their freedom for that of the president of the employers’ association and at the
same time to cause the federal government to lose face; subsidiary to this, if the federal
government did not agree to this exchange, to lead it to give up the ‘Rule of Law (l’État de
droit)’ established long ago with the support of the Western powers, so as to return to a
‘state’ where violence would replace law, in a word to an authoritarianism close to
Nazism.”
19. See H. Mohnhaupt, “L’État de droit en Allemagne: histoire, notion, fonction,” Cahiers de
philosophie politique et juridique, no. 24, 1993: “L’État de droit,” pp. 75–76: “The notion of the182
20.
21.
22.
23.
24.
25.
26.
27.
t h e b i rt h o f b i o p o l i t i c s
Rule of law (l’État de droit) in Germany was directed, on the one hand, against the police
state, that is to say, state administration in the sense of the Welfare State, and on the other,
against the arbitrary state of absolutism. The combination of the two words droit and État
appeared for the first time in Germany in 1798, in Johann Wilhelm Petersen who, under
the name of Placidus [Literatur der Staats-Lehre. Eine Versuch, 1 (Strasbourg: 1798) p. 73],
described with this formula the philosophical juridical doctrine of Kant which he entitled
‘the critique or the school of the doctrine of the Rule of law (l’État de droit)’ [die kritische
oder die Schule der Rechts-Staats-Lehre].” See M. Stolleis, “Rechtsstaat,” in Handwörterbuch zur
deutschen Rechtsgeschichte, vol. IV (Berlin: E. Schmidt, 1990) col 326, and by the same
author, Geschichte des öffentlichen Rechts in Deutschland (Munich: C.H. Beck, 1988) vol. 1,
p. 326; French translation by M. Senellart as Histoire du droit public en Allemagne,
1600–1800 (Paris: PUF, 1998) p. 490.
C. Th. Welcker, Die letzten Gründe von Recht, Staat und Strafe (Giessen: Heyer, 1813),
pp. 13–26. See H. Mohnhaupt, “L’État de droit in Allemagne: histoire, notion, fonction,”
p. 78: “[He traced] the following stages of the development of the state: despotism, as state
of sensibility, theocracy as state of belief, and, as the supreme development the ‘Rule of Law
(État de droit)’ as ‘state of reason’.” The manuscript, p. 12, adds the following references:
“Von Mohl, studies on the United States and federal law (Bundesstaatsrecht) [= Das Bundes-
Staatsrecht der Vereinigten Staaten von Nord-Amerika (Stuttgart: 1824)], Polizeiwissenschaft nach
den Grundsätzen des Rechtsstaates ([Tubingen: Laupp] 2 vol., 1832[-1833]); F.J. Stahl,
Philosophie des Rechts [= Die Philosophie des Rechts nach geschichtlicher Ansicht (Heidelberg:
J.C.B. Mohr, 1830–1837) 2 vol].”
Rudolf von Gneist, Der Rechtsstaat (Berlin: J. Springer, 1872); 2nd edition with the title
Der Rechtsstaat und die Verwaltungsgerichte in Deutschland (Berlin: J. Springer, 1879). Foucault
relies here on F. Hayek, to whom he refers later, The Constitution of Liberty, 1976 ed., p. 200
(ch. 13: “Liberalism and Administration: The ‘Rechtsstaat’ ”).
Otto Bähr, Der Rechtsstaat. Eine publizistische Skizze (Cassel: Wigand, 1864), republished
(Aalen: Scientia Verlag, 1961). See Hayek, The Constitution of Liberty, p. 200 on this “justi-
cialist” conception of the Rechtsstaat. On this point, see M. Stolleis, Geschichte des öffentlichen
Rechts in Deutschland (Munich: C.H. Beck, 1992) p. 387.
F. Hayek, The Constitution of Liberty, pp. 203–204, refers here to the classic work of
A.V. Dicey, Lectures Introductory to the Study of the Law of the Constitution (London: Macmillan
& Co., 1886), which he reproaches for “completely misunderstanding the use of the term
[Rule of Law/Rechtsstaat] on the continent” ibid. p. 484, n. 35.
The heir of the old Conseil du roi, the Conseil d’État was created by the Constitution of Year
VIII (15 December 1799) and is the highest jurisdictional organ in France. “Since the
reform of 1953, it has recognized three types of disputed appeal: in the first instance,
against certain important administrative acts, such as decrees, in appeal against all judg-
ments made by administrative courts, and in cassation against the rulings of administrative
jurisdictions deliberating in the final instance. The rulings of the Council of State all enjoy
the definitive authority of the matter judged” (Encyclopaedia Universalis, Thesaurus, t. 18,
1974, p. 438).
Hayek, after remarking that Dicey, ignoring the German evolution of administrative law,
only had knowledge of the French system, observes that, in relation to the latter “his severe
strictures may then have been somewhat justified, although even at that time the Conseil
d’État had already initiated a development which, as a modern observer has suggested
[M.A. Sieghart, Government by Decree (London: Stevens, 1950) p. 221] ‘might in time
succeed in bringing all discretionary powers of the administration ... within the range of
judicial control’” The Constitution of Liberty, p. 204. He adds, however, that Dicey later rec-
ognized that he was partly mistaken, in his article, “Droit administratif in Modern French
Law,” Law Quarterly Review, vol. XVII, 1901.
F.A. Hayek, The Constitution of Liberty. Actually, Foucault’s references are not to this
book but to The Road to Serfdom. See ch. 5, pp. 54–65: “Planning and the Rule of Law”
which could be linked with ch. 15 of The Constitution of Liberty: “Economic policy and the
Rule of Law.”
Ibid. (ch. VI) p. 55: “Economic planning of the collectivist kind necessarily involves the
very opposite of this [the Rule of Law].”21 February 1979
183
28. Ibid.: “Under the second [direction of economic activity by a central authority] the
government directs the use of the means of production to particular ends.”
29. Ibid.: “The planning authority ... must constantly decide questions which cannot be
answered by formal principles only, and in making these decisions it must set up distinc-
tions of merit between the needs of different people.”
30. Ibid. p. 36: “What [the supporters of central planning] generally suggest is that the
increasing difficulty of obtaining a coherent picture of the complete economic process
makes it indispensable that things should be co-ordinated by some central agency if social
life is not to dissolve in chaos.”
31. Ibid. p. 54: “government in all its actions is bound by rules fixed and announced
beforehand—rules which make it possible to foresee with fair certainty how the authority
will use its coercive powers in given circumstances,” and, “under the Rule of Law the
government is prevented from stultifying individual efforts by ad hoc action.”
32. Ibid. p. 36 (on the impossibility of having a “synoptic view” of the whole of the economic
process): “As decentralisation has become necessary because nobody can consciously balance
all the considerations bearing on the decisions of so many individuals, the co-ordination can
clearly not be effected by ‘conscious control,’ but only by arrangements which convey to
each agent the information he must possess in order effectively to adjust his decisions to
those of others.” On this necessary blindness of the state with regard to economic
processes, see Foucault’s reading of Adam Smith’s “invisible hand” below, lecture of
28 March 1979, pp. 279–281.
33. The manuscript refers here to Road of Serfdom [sic], but the quotation is undoubtedly a
fairly free adaptation of the text. See p. 55: “Under the first [the Rule of Law] the govern-
ment confines itself to fixing rules determining the conditions under which the available
resources may be used, leaving to the individuals the decision for what ends they are to be
used. Under the second [central planning] the government directs the use of the means of
production to particular ends.”
34. Michael Polanyi (1891–1976): chemist, economist, and philosopher originally from
Hungary (the brother of the historian Karl Polanyi). He was professor of chemistry at
Manchester University from 1933 to 1948, and then professor of social sciences at the same
university from 1948 to 1958. The quotation is taken from The Logic of Liberty: Reflections
and rejoinders (London: Chicago University Press, 1951) p. 185: “ ... the main function of the
existing spontaneous order of jurisdiction is to govern the spontaneous order of economic
life. A consultative system of law develops and enforces the rules under which the competitive
system of production and distribution operates. No marketing system can function with-
out a legal framework which guarantees adequate proprietary powers and enforces
contracts.”
35. See “Le citron et le lait” (October 1978) in Dits et Écrits, 3, p. 698; English translation
by Robert Hurley, “Lemon and Milk” in Essential Works of Foucault, 3, p. 438: “Law and
Order is not simply the motto of American conservatism ( ... ). Just as people say milk or
lemon, we should say law or order. It is up to us to draw lessons for the future from that
incompatibility.”
36. Foucault does not return to this subject in the next lecture.
37. In 1977, Foucault participated in the days of reflection of the magistrate’s union and dis-
cussed the work Liberté, Libertés (1976), directed by R. Badinter; he criticized “the
increased role that the Socialist Party assigned to judges and judicial power as a means of
social regulation” (Daniel Defert, “Chronologie,” Dits et Écrits, 1, p. 51). The text appeared
posthumously in the Union’s journal, Justice, no. 115, June 1984, pp. 36–39 (not reproduced
in Dits et Écrits).
38. W. Röpke, The Social Crisis of Our Times, Part II, chapter 2, p. 193: “Indeed, the law courts
of a country are the last citadel of the authority of the state and of trust in the state, and no
state is completely lost where this citadel is still intact. This leads us to urge more insist-
ently than has ever been done before that the law courts should be made organs of national
economic policy and that they should be given jurisdiction over matters which up to now
have been left to the administrative agencies.” He sees the American anti-trust legislation,
since the Sherman Act of 2 July 1890, as an example allowing one to see how “such a
judicially directed economic policy is likely to work in practice.”184
t h e b i rt h o f b i o p o l i t i c s
39. See above, lecture of 14 February 1979, note 59.
40. See Joseph A. Schumpeter, Capitalism, Socialism and Democracy, Part II: “Can Capitalism
Survive?” and in particular pp. 139–142, “The Destruction of the Institutional Framework
of Capitalist Society.”
41. Ibid. p. 167: “By socialist society we shall designate an institutional pattern in which the
control over the means of production and over production itself is vested with a central
authority—or, as we may say, in which, as a matter of principle, the economic affairs of
society belong to the public and not to the private sphere.”
42. See ibid, Part IV, pp. 232–302: “Socialism and Democracy.” See in particular the conclu-
sion, pp. 296–302, on the problem of democracy in a socialist regime: “No responsible per-
son can view with equanimity the consequences of extending the democratic method, that
is to say the sphere of ‘politics,’ to all economic affairs. Believing that democratic socialism
means precisely this, such a person will naturally conclude that democratic socialism must
fail. But this does not necessarily follow. As has been pointed out before, extension of the
range of public management does not imply corresponding extension of the range of
political management. Conceivably, the former may be extended so as to absorb a nation’s
economic affairs while the latter still remains within the boundaries set by the limitations
of the democratic method.”eight
7 March 1979
[
]
General remarks: (1) The methodological scope of the analysis
of micro-powers. (2) The inflationism of state phobia. Its links
with ordoliberalism. ⵑ Two theses on the totalitarian state and
the decline of state governmentality in the twentieth century. ⵑ
Remarks on the spread of the German model, in France and in the
United States. ⵑ The German neo-liberal model and the French
project of a “social market economy.” ⵑ The French context of the
transition to a neo-liberal economics. ⵑ French social policy: the
example of social security. ⵑ The separation of the economic and
the social according to Giscard d’Estaing. ⵑ The project of a
“negative tax” and its social and political stakes. “Relative” and
“absolute” poverty. Abandonment of the policy of full employment.
I WOULD LIKE TO assure you that, in spite of everything, I really did
intend to talk about biopolitics, and then, things being what they are, I
have ended up talking at length, and maybe for too long, about neo-
liberalism, and neo-liberalism in its German form. I must however
explain a little this change to the direction I wanted to give these lec-
tures. Obviously, I have not spoken at such length about neo-liberalism,
and worse, about the German form of neo-liberalism, because I wanted
to trace the historical or theoretical “background”* of German Christian
* In English in the original; G.B.186
t h e b i rt h o f b i o p o l i t i c s
Democracy. Nor was it so as to denounce what is not socialist in the gov-
ernments of Willy Brandt or Helmut Schmidt. 1 I have dwelt so long on
this problem of German neo-liberalism first of all for methodological
reasons, because, continuing what I began to say last year, I wanted to see
what concrete content could be given to the analysis of relations of
power—it being understood, of course, and I repeat it once again, that
power can in no way be considered either as a principle in itself, or as
having explanatory value which functions from the outset. The term
itself, power, does no more than designate a [domain]* of relations
which are entirely still to be analyzed, and what I have proposed to call
governmentality, that is to say, the way in which one conducts the
conduct of men, is no more than a proposed analytical grid for these
relations of power.
So, we have been trying out this notion of governmentality and, sec-
ond, seeing how this grid of governmentality, which we may assume is
valid for the analysis of ways of conducting the conduct of mad people,
patients, delinquents, and children, may equally be valid when we are
dealing with phenomena of a completely different scale, such as an eco-
nomic policy, for example, or the management of a whole social body,
and so on. What I wanted to do—and this was what was at stake in the
analysis—was to see the extent to which we could accept that the analy-
sis of micro-powers, or of procedures of governmentality, is not confined
by definition to a precise domain determined by a sector of the scale,
but should be considered simply as a point of view, a method of de-
cipherment which may be valid for the whole scale, whatever its size. In
other words, the analysis of micro-powers is not a question of scale, and
it is not a question of a sector, it is a question of a point of view. Good.
This, if you like, was the methodological reason.
A second reason for dwelling on these problems of neo-liberalism is
what I would call a reason of critical morality. Actually, going by the
recurrence of certain themes, we could say that what is currently chal-
lenged, and from a great many perspectives, is almost always the state:
the unlimited growth of the state, its omnipotence, its bureaucratic
* M.F.: term7 March 1979
187
development, the state with the seeds of fascism it contains, the state’s
inherent violence beneath its social welfare paternalism ... I think there
are two important elements which are fairly constant in this theme of
the critique of the state.
First, there is the idea that the state possesses in itself and through its
own dynamism a sort of power of expansion, an intrinsic tendency to
expand, an endogenous imperialism constantly pushing it to spread its
surface and increase in extent, depth, and subtlety to the point that it
will come to take over entirely that which is at the same time its other,
its outside, its target, and its object, namely: civil society. The first ele-
ment which seems to me to run through all this general theme of state
phobia is therefore this intrinsic power of the state in relation to its
object-target, civil society.
The second element which it seems to me is constantly found in these
general themes of state phobia is that there is a kinship, a sort of genetic
continuity or evolutionary implication between different forms of the
state, with the administrative state, the welfare state, the bureaucratic
state, the fascist state, and the totalitarian state all being, in no matter
which of the various analyses, the successive branches of one and the
same great tree of state control in its continuous and unified expansion.
These two ideas, which are close to each other and support each other—
namely, [first], that the state has an unlimited force of expansion in
relation to the object-target, civil society, and second, that forms of state
give rise to each other on the basis of a specific dynamism of the state—
seem to me to form a kind of critical commonplace frequently found
today. Now it seems to me that these themes put in circulation what
could be called an inflationary critical value, an inflationary critical
currency. Why inflationary?
In the first place, it is inflationary because I think the theme encour-
ages the growth, at a constantly accelerating speed, of the interchange-
ability of analyses. As soon as we accept the existence of this continuity
or genetic kinship between different forms of the state, and as soon as we
attribute a constant evolutionary dynamism to the state, it then becomes
possible not only to use different analyses to support each other, but
also to refer them back to each other and so deprive them of their speci-
ficity. For example, an analysis of social security and the administrative188
t h e b i rt h o f b i o p o l i t i c s
apparatus on which it rests ends up, via some slippages and thanks to
some plays on words, referring us to the analysis of concentration camps.
And, in the move from social security to concentration camps the requi-
site specificity of analysis is diluted. 2 So, there is inflation in the sense of
an increasing interchangeability of analyses and a loss of specificity.
This critique seems to me to be equally inflationary for a second
reason, which is that it allows one to practice what could be called a
general disqualification by the worst. Whatever the object of analysis,
however tenuous or meager it is, and whatever its real functioning, to the
extent that it can always be referred to something which will be worse
by virtue of the state’s intrinsic dynamic and the final forms it may take,
the less can always be disqualified by the more, the better by the worst.
I am not taking an example of the better, obviously, but think, for
example, of some unfortunate who smashes a cinema display case and,
in a system like ours, is taken to court and sentenced rather severely; you
will always find people to say that this sentence is the sign that the state
is becoming fascist, as if, well before any fascist state, there were no
sentences of this kind—or much worse.
The third factor, the third inflationary mechanism which seems to
me to be characteristic of this type of analysis, is that it enables one to
avoid paying the price of reality and actuality inasmuch as, in the name
of this dynamism of the state, something like a kinship or danger, some-
thing like the great fantasy of the paranoiac and devouring state can
always be found. To that extent, ultimately it hardly matters what one’s
grasp of reality is or what profile of actuality reality presents. It is
enough, through suspicion and, as François Ewald would say, “denunci-
ation,” 3 to find something like the fantastical profile of the state and
there is no longer any need to analyze actuality. The elision of actuality
seems to me [to be] the third inflationary mechanism we find in this
critique.
Finally, I would say that this critique in terms of the mechanism and
dynamism of the state is inflationary inasmuch as it does not carry out a
criticism or analysis of itself. That is to say, it does not seek to know the
real source of this kind of anti-state suspicion, this state phobia that
currently circulates in such varied forms of our thought. Now it seems to
me—and this is why I have laid such stress on the neo-liberalism of7 March 1979
189
1930–1950—that this kind of analysis, this critique of the state, of its
intrinsic and irrepressible dynamism, and of its interlinking forms that
call on each other, mutually support each other, and reciprocally engen-
der each other is effectively, completely, and already very clearly formu-
lated in the years 1930–1945. At this time it was quite precisely
localized and did not have the force of circulation it has now. We find it
precisely localized within the neo-liberal choices being developed at this
time. You find this critique of the polymorphous, omnipresent, and all-
powerful state in these years when, liberalism or neo-liberalism, or even
more precisely, ordoliberalism was engaged in distinguishing itself from
the Keynesian critique and at the same time undertaking the critique of
New Deal and Popular Front policies of state control and intervention,
of National Socialist economics and politics, of the political and eco-
nomic choices of the Soviet Union, or, in a word, of socialism generally.
It is in this context, in this German neo-liberal school, and taking things
in their narrowest or almost petty form, that we find both this analysis
of the necessary and as it were inevitable kinship between different
forms of the state, and also this idea that the state has a specific, intrin-
sic dynamism which means that it can never halt its expansion and
complete takeover of the whole of civil society.
I would just like to quote two texts that testify to the precocity of
these two ideas which seem so contemporary, alive, and actual to us. I
will quote Röpke’s reaction, in June-July 1943 in a Swiss journal, 4 in
which he criticizes the recently published Beveridge plan and says: the
Beveridge plan leads to “ever more social insurance, ever more social
bureaucracy, ever more upheaval of incomes, ever more stamps to stick
and seals to affix, ever more subscriptions and contributions, ever more
concentration of power, national income, and responsibility in the hands
of the state that, in any case, embraces everything, regulates everything,
concentrates and controls everything with the single certain result of
exercising on society an even more centralized action of proletarianiza-
tion and state control that destroys the middle class.” 5 At exactly the
same time, in England in 1943, and again in reaction to the post-war
plans being constructed by the Anglo-Americans, and especially the
English, Hayek wrote the following: “it is Germany whose fate we are in
some danger of repeating.” 6 He did not say this because of the danger of190
t h e b i rt h o f b i o p o l i t i c s
a German invasion of England, which had been definitively averted by
then. In 1943, experiencing Germany’s fate meant for Hayek adopting
the Beveridge system of socialization, interventionist economics, plan-
ning, and social security. Moreover, he clarified by adding: We are not
close to Hitler’s Germany exactly, but to the Germany of the previous
war. As in the latter case, there is the wish “[to preserve]* for produc-
tive ends the organization which was developed for purposes of national
defense.” 7 There is a refusal to “recognize that the rise of Fascism and
Nazism was not a reaction against the socialist trends of the preceding
period, but a necessary outcome of those tendencies.” 8 So, with regard
to the Beveridge plan Hayek said that we are close to Germany. It is true
that he was referring to Wilhelmine Germany, to the Germany anyway
of the 1914 war, but this Germany, with its interventionist practices, its
planning techniques, and its socialist choices, was what really engen-
dered Nazism, and in drawing close to the Germany of 1914–1918 we
also draw close to Nazi Germany. The dangers of German invasion are
far from being definitively averted. The English socialists, the Labour
Party, and the Beveridge plan will be the real agents of the Nazification
of England through the excess and growth of state control. So, you can
see that these are all old and localized themes, and I take them in their
1945 formulation. You find them in 1939, in 1933, and even before. 9
Well, against this inflationary critique of the state, against this kind
of laxness, I would like to suggest some theses which have been present,
roughly, in what I have already said, but on which I would like to take a
bit of a bearing. In the first place is the thesis that the welfare state has
neither the same form, of course, nor, it seems to me, the same root or
origin as the totalitarian state, as the Nazi, fascist, or Stalinist state. I
would also like to suggest that the characteristic feature of the state we
call totalitarian is far from being the endogenous intensification and
extension of the mechanisms of the state; it is not at all the exaltation
but rather a limitation, a reduction, and a subordination of the auton-
omy of the state, of its specificity and specific functioning—but in rela-
tion to what? In relation to something else, which is the party. In other
* M.F.: to consider7 March 1979
191
words, the idea would be that we should not look for the principle of
totalitarian regimes in the intrinsic development of the state and its
mechanisms: the totalitarian state is not the eighteenth century admin-
istrative state, the nineteenth century Polizeistaat pushed to the limit, it
is not the administrative state, the bureaucratized nineteenth century
state pushed to its limits. The totalitarian state is something else.
We should not look for its principle in the “statifying” or “statified”
(étatisante ou étatisée) governmentality born in the seventeenth and eigh-
teenth centuries; we should look for it in a non-state governmentality,
precisely in what could be called a governmentality of the party. The
party, this quite extraordinary, very curious, and very new organization,
this very new governmentality of the party which appeared in Europe at
the end of the nineteenth century is probably—well, in any case this is
what I may try to show you next year, if I still have these ideas in
mind 10 —at the historical origin of something like totalitarian regimes,
of something like Nazism, fascism, or Stalinism.
Another thesis I would like to put forward—and this is, in short, the
other side of what I have just been saying—is that what is presently at
issue in our reality, what we see emerging in our twentieth century soci-
eties, is not so much the growth of the state and of raison d’État, but
much more its reduction, and in two forms. One of these is precisely the
reduction of state governmentality through the growth of party govern-
mentality, and the other form of reduction is the kind we can observe in
regimes like our own in which there is an attempt to find a liberal gov-
ernmentality. I add straightaway that in saying this I am not trying to
make a value judgment. In speaking of liberal governmentality, in using
this word “liberal,” I do not want to make sacred or immediately attach
value to this type of governmentality. Nor do I mean that it is not legit-
imate, if one wishes, to hate the state. But what I think we should not
do is imagine we are describing a real, actual process concerning our-
selves when we denounce the growth of state control, or the state
becoming fascist, or the establishment of a state violence, and so on. All
those who share in the great state phobia should know that they are
following the direction of the wind and that in fact, for years and years,
an effective reduction of the state has been on the way, a reduction of
both the growth of state control and of a “statifying” and “statified”192
t h e b i rt h o f b i o p o l i t i c s
(étatisante et étatisée) governmentality. I am not saying at all that we
delude ourselves on the faults or merits of the state when we say “this is
very bad” or “this is very good”; that is not my problem. I am saying
that we should not delude ourselves by attributing to the state itself a
process of becoming fascist which is actually exogenous 11 and due much
more to the state’s reduction and dislocation. I also mean that we should
not delude ourselves about the nature of the historical process which
currently renders the state both so intolerable and so problematic. It is
for this reason that I would like to study more closely the organization
and diffusion of what could be called this German model. It is under-
stood, of course, that the model as I have described it and in some of the
forms of its diffusion which I would now like to show you, is not the
model—so often discredited, dismissed, held in contempt, and loathed—
of the Bismarckian state becoming the Hitler state. The German model
which is being diffused, debated, and forms part of our actuality, struc-
turing it and carving out its real shape, is the model of a possible neo-
liberal governmentality.
We could follow the spread of the German model in two ways. Today
I will try to look at its spread in France, and maybe, if I don’t change my
mind, I will do the same for the USA next week. What we could call the
diffusion of the German model in France has taken place slowly, insidi-
ously, and creakingly with, I think, three characteristics. First of all, we
should not forget that the diffusion of the German neo-liberal model has
taken place in France on the basis of a strongly state-centered, interven-
tionist, and administrative governmentality, with precisely all the prob-
lems this entails. Second, the attempt to introduce and implement the
German neo-liberal model in France takes place in a context of an ini-
tially relatively limited, and now acute economic crisis which is the
motive, pretext, and reason for the introduction and implementation of
the model and, at the same time, what checks it. Finally, for the reasons
I have just mentioned, the third characteristic is that the agents of the
spread and implementation of this model are precisely those who
administer and direct the state in this context of crisis. Because of all
this, the implementation of the German model in France involves a
whole range of difficulties and a sort of awkwardness mixed with
hypocrisy, examples of which we will see.7 March 1979
193
In the United States, the diffusion of the German model takes on a
completely different appearance. And first of all, can we really speak of
a diffusion of the German model? After all, liberalism, the liberal tradi-
tion, the constant renewal of liberal politics, has been a constant in the
United States, which means that what we are now seeing, or what was
seen in reaction to the New Deal, is not necessarily the diffusion of the
German model. It can also be seen as a phenomenon which is absolutely
endogenous to the United States. We would have to undertake more pre-
cise studies on the role played by German emigrants like Hayek, for
example, in the United States. Fine. Between American neo-liberalism
and the German neo-liberal model, basically formed around the
Freiburg people, there is a whole range of historical relationships which
are undoubtedly difficult to unravel.
The second characteristic of the diffusion of the German model in the
United States is that it too takes place in a context of crisis, but of a com-
pletely different crisis than the one experienced in France, since it is an
economic crisis, of course, but with a completely different form and
undoubtedly less acute. It develops within a political crisis in which the
problem of the influence, action, and intervention of the federal govern-
ment, the problem of its political credibility and so forth, had already
been posed at the time of the New Deal, and all the more so with
Johnson, Nixon, 12 and Carter. 13
Finally, the third characteristic of this diffusion of neo-liberalism in
the United States is that instead of being in a sense the almost exclusive
property of governmental personnel and advisors, as is the case in
France, neo-liberal governmentality appears, at least in part, as a sort of
major economic-political alternative which, at a certain moment at any
rate, takes the form of, if not a mass movement, at least a widespread
movement of political opposition within American society. All this
means that it is completely impossible to deal with the diffusion of the
German model in France and the American neo-liberal movement at the
same time. The two phenomena are not completely overlapping and can-
not be superimposed on each another, although there is, of course, a
whole system of exchanges and supports between them.
So, today I would like to speak a little about what we could call neo-
liberalism in France and the existence of the German model. To tell the194
t h e b i rt h o f b i o p o l i t i c s
truth, for a long time I have been a bit uneasy because I honestly believe
that it is not possible to read—for they must be read—the speeches,
writings, and texts of Giscard, Barre, 14 [or] his advisors, without being
immediately struck in a clear, but simply intuitive way, by a kinship
between what they say and the German model, German ordoliberalism
and the ideas of Röpke, Müller-Armack, etcetera. Now it is very diffi-
cult to find just the act of acknowledgement, the statement that would
permit one to say: There you are, this really is what they are doing, and
they know it. It was very difficult until very recently and almost until a
few weeks ago. Right at the end of 1978, in December I think, a book by
Christian Stoffaës appeared, entitled La Grande Menace industrielle. 15
Stoffaës being one of the closest advisors to the present government, an
economic advisor with special reference to industrial questions, 16 I
thought that maybe I would find in this book what I was looking for,
but I was quickly disappointed, for on the back cover of the book one
reads that the author, “rejecting the temptation to hurriedly transpose
the German and Japanese models, sets out the bases for an original
industrial policy.” 17 I said to myself: Once again I will not find what I
want. But what is funny, the curious thing which is quite revealing of
the clear reasons why these things cannot be said, is that if this state-
ment is found on the back cover of the book, in the concluding chapter
which summarizes the whole analysis, the final or penultimate para-
graph I think, summarizing what the book has proposed, begins in this
way: “Ultimately what is involved is the model of the social market
economy”—so, the phrase is uttered—with simply, the author adds, “a
little more revolutionary boldness than across the Rhine.” 18 In fact, he
says, it is a question of constructing both an efficient market economy
open to the world and an advanced social project. 19
There is no question of giving you an overall analysis of the policy of
Giscard, 20 or of Giscard-Barre, first of all because I am not capable of
doing this and secondly because there is no doubt that it would not
interest you. I would just like to consider some of its aspects. First, to
put things back in their context a bit I will give some information about
what we could call the economic context which has speeded up the
introduction and implementation of this model over the last few years.
Let’s summarize very schematically. Let’s say that following the great7 March 1979
195
crisis of the 1930s, all in all, every government of whatever type knew
that the economic elements which they had to take into consideration—
whatever the nature of their options, whatever their choices and
objectives—were full employment, stable prices, equilibrium of the bal-
ance of payments, growth of the GNP, the redistribution of income and
wealth, and the provision of social services. Roughly speaking, this con-
stitutes the list of what Bentham would have called, in his terms, the
economic agenda of government, the things it must concern itself with,
whatever the way it may choose to do so. 21 Let’s say that in this set of
objectives, the German neo- or ordoliberal formula, you recall, consisted
in adopting price stability and the balance of payments as the primary
objective, with growth and all the other elements being in some way the
consequence of these primary, absolute objectives. On the other hand,
England and France—France at the time of the Popular Front and then
after Liberation, England at the time of the development of the
Beveridge plan and the victory of the Labour Party in 1945—adopted
full employment rather than price stability as the primary and absolute
objective, the provision of social services rather than the balance of pay-
ments, and assuring full employment and the provision of social services
obviously implied a voluntarist kind of extensive, strong, and sustained
growth.
Let’s leave aside the problem of why, all things considered, the pur-
suit of these objectives in England failed or revealed their drastic limits
in the period from 1955 to 1975, while in France the same policy led to
some positive results. Let’s say that this was the situation at the start
and the reason why, attenuated by a range of liberal type measures, these
interventionist objectives and methods, and these planning procedures
focused on full employment and the distribution of social services, were
basically still maintained under De Gaulle, as the 5th Plan clearly
shows. 22 Simplifying considerably, we can say that from 1970 to 1975, or
anyway in the decade now coming to a close, the problem arises of the
final liquidation of these objectives and forms of economic-political pri-
ority. It is in this decade that the problem arises of the overall transition
to a neo-liberal economy, that is to say, roughly, catching up and insert-
ing the German model. The reasons, the immediate economic pretexts
and incentives were of course the crisis, which appeared before 1973 in a196
t h e b i rt h o f b i o p o l i t i c s
pre-crisis characterized by a constant rise in unemployment since 1969,
a fall from credit balance in the balance of payments, and increasing
inflation: all those signs which, according to the economists, did not
indicate a Keynesian type of crisis situation, that is to say, a crisis of
under consumption, but actually a crisis concerning the regime of
investment. That is to say, roughly, it was thought that the crisis was due
to errors in investment policy, to insufficiently rationalized and pro-
grammed investment choices. It was against this pre-crisis background
that what was called the oil crisis broke, which was in fact an increase in
the cost of energy that was due not to the formation of a cartel of sellers
fixing a price which was too high, but rather to the reduction of the eco-
nomic and political influence of the cartel of buyers and the formation of
a market price for both oil and energy generally, or at any rate, a ten-
dency for the price of energy to fall in line with market prices. So, in this
context—please excuse the absolutely schematic character of all this—it
is easy to see how economic liberalism could appear, and actually did
appear, as the only solution to this pre-crisis and its acceleration
through the increasing cost of energy. Liberalism, that is to say, the total,
unrestricted integration of the French economy in an internal, European,
and world market, was the choice which appeared, first of all, as the only
way to be able to rectify the erroneous investment choices made in the
previous period because of interventionist objectives, techniques, and so
on; so, liberalism was the only means of correcting these investment
errors by taking into account the new factor of the high cost of energy,
which was in reality only the formation of a market price for energy. The
general insertion of the French economy in the market in order to cor-
rect the errors of investment, on the one hand, and in order to adjust the
French economy to the new cost of energy, on the other, seemed then to
be the self-evident solution.
You will say that this is, after all, only an episode in those regular and
sometimes rapid swings which France has experienced since the war,
since 1920, between a rather interventionist, dirigiste, protectionist pol-
icy interested in overall balances and concerned about full employment,
and a liberal policy more open to the outside world and more concerned
about exchange and the currency. The swings, if you like, that marked
the Pinay government in 1951–1952, 23 the Rueff reform of 1958, 24 also7 March 1979
197
represent inflections towards liberalism. Now, what I think is presently
in question, and for which the economic crisis, whose aspects I have very
briefly tried to define, has served as the pretext, is not just one of those
swings from interventionism to a bit more liberalism. In fact, it seems to
me that the question today is the entire stakes of a policy that would be
neo-liberal overall. Once again, since I do not intend to describe this
policy in every aspect, I would just like to consider an aspect which does
not concern the economy strictly speaking, or the direct and immediate
insertion of the French economy in a world market economy; I would
like to consider [this policy]* in another aspect, that of social policy. In
the present government, in the present governmentality which was vir-
tually entailed with the arrival in power of Giscard and his policy, what
has social policy been, what could it be, and towards what is it directed?
This is what I would now like to talk about.
Let’s say once again, in a few schematic historical remarks, that the
post-Liberation social policy which had been programmed during the
war was dominated in France and England by two problems and a
model. The two problems were, first, the maintenance of full employ-
ment as the main economic and social priority, because the 1929 eco-
nomic crisis was attributed to the absence of full employment. The
absence of full employment was also blamed for all the political conse-
quences it had in Germany and in Europe generally. So, the first prob-
lem was the maintenance of full employment for economic, social, and
therefore political reasons. The second problem was to avoid the effects
of a devaluation made necessary by a policy of growth. To maintain full
employment and attenuate the effects of devaluation which makes sav-
ing and individual capitalization ineffective it was thought necessary to
establish a policy of social security coverage of risks. The model for the
techniques for achieving these objectives was war, that is to say, the
model of national solidarity which consists in not asking people why
what happened to them happened, nor to what economic category they
belong. Anything that happens to an individual in terms of shortage,
accident, or unknown causes must be taken care of by the whole
* M.F.: consider it198
t h e b i rt h o f b i o p o l i t i c s
community in the name of national solidarity. These two objectives and
this model explain why the English and French social policies were poli-
cies of collective consumption assured by a permanent redistribution of
income, by a collective consumption and permanent redistribution
which has to concern the whole population, with just some privileged
sectors. In France, due to policies directed at increasing the birthrate,
the family was seen as one of the sectors which had to be especially priv-
ileged, but generally speaking it was thought that it was up to the entire
community to provide cover for the risks faced by individuals. Once
these objectives have been fixed and this model for achieving them has
been chosen, the question arises, of course, of whether such a policy,
presented as a social policy, is necessarily an economic policy at the same
time. In other words, does not this policy bring with it willy-nilly a
whole series of economic effects which are in danger of introducing
unforeseen consequences and, as it is said, perverse effects on the
economy itself, which will disrupt the economic system and the social
system?
Several answers have been given to this question. Some say yes. Of
course, this kind of policy will produce economic effects, but these are
precisely the effects we are looking for. That is to say, for example, the
redistribution of income and the equalization of income and consump-
tion is precisely the effect sought, and social policy only has real mean-
ing if it introduces some corrections and leveling within the economic
regime which liberal policy itself and economic mechanisms in them-
selves could not guarantee. Others say, not at all. The social policy we
envisage setting up, or which has been established since 1945, 25 actually
has no direct effect on the economy, or its effect on the economy is so
adjusted to, so in conformity with the mechanisms of the economy
themselves that it cannot disrupt them. It is very interesting to note that
Laroque, 26 the man who did not invent social security in France but who
was behind its organization and devised its mechanism, in a text from
1947 or ’48, 27 I no longer remember, gave precisely this explanation and
justification of social security. Precisely at the time that it was being set
up, he said: Don’t worry, Social Security is not designed to produce and
cannot have any economic effects other than beneficial ones. 28 He
defined social security in the following way: It is no more than a7 March 1979
199
technique to ensure that each “can provide for himself and those for
whom he is responsible in every circumstance.” 29 What does providing
for himself and those for whom he is responsible mean? It means, sim-
ply, establishing a mechanism such that social security contributions are
deducted solely from wages, in other words, that there will be a virtual
wage in addition to the wage really paid in monetary form. In truth this
is not an addition, but in fact you will have a total wage part of which
will be in the form of a wage strictly speaking, and the other part will
be in the form of social benefits. In other words, social security costs are
paid for by the wage itself, by the mass of wages, and by nothing else.
This is not a solidarity imposed on non-wage-earners for the benefit of
wage-earners, it is “a solidarity imposed on the mass of wage-earners”
for their own advantage, “to the advantage,” says Laroque, “of their chil-
dren and the aged.” 30 So this Social Security cannot be said to put a
strain on the economy, to overburden it, or increase the costs of the econ-
omy. In fact, Social Security was just a particular way of paying what is
no more than a wage; it does not put a strain on the economy. Even bet-
ter, basically it enables us not to raise wages, and consequently its effect
is to reduce the costs of the economy by pacifying social conflicts by
enabling wage claims to be less steep and pressing. This is what Laroque
said in 1947, ’48, to explain the mechanism of Social Security that he
had himself perfected. 31
Thirty years later, in 1976, a report appeared in the Revue française des
affaires sociales which is very interesting because it was written by some
ENA* students as a study-appraisal of thirty years of Social Security, 32
and these students made the following observation. In the first place,
they say, Social Security has a considerable economic impact and this is
linked, moreover, to the very way in which the basis for assessing contri-
butions was defined. The impact, in fact, is on the cost of labor. Due to
Social Security labor becomes more expensive. When labor costs more, it
is obvious that there will be a restrictive effect on employment, so there
will be an increase in unemployment due directly to the increase in the
cost of labor. 33 There is [equally] an effect on international competition,
* École nationale d’administration; G.B.200
t h e b i rt h o f b i o p o l i t i c s
inasmuch as the existence of different social security regimes in different
countries means that international competition is distorted, and dis-
torted to the detriment of countries with the most comprehensive social
insurance cover for risks. That is to say, here again there is a source of
increasing unemployment. 34 Finally, and still due to this increase in the
cost of labor, there will be a speeding-up of industrial concentration,
and the development of monopolies and multinationals. So, they say, the
policy of social security has obvious economic consequences.
Second, not only do these consequences appear as a result of the cost
of labor and produce a rise in unemployment, but on top of this, the
way in which an upper limit is set for contributions, that is to say, the
difference between contributions as a percentage of earnings has effects
on the distribution of income. 35 Relying on a number of previous inves-
tigations, the ENA students were able to show that, [for the same wage,
instead of redistribution going]* from the young to the old, from the
unmarried to those with a family, from the healthy to the sick, due to
the upper limit on contributions there was in fact a wide spread of real
incomes which advantaged the better off to the detriment of the worse
off. So, they say, the way Social Security has operated for thirty years
introduces a number of specifically economic effects. Now “the objective
of Social Security is not and should not be an economic objective. The
ways in which it is financed should not, by distorting the law of the
market, be an element of economic policy. Social Security must remain
economically neutral.” 36 Here you find again, almost word for word, the
same things I talked about last week (or two weeks ago) with regard to
the German ordoliberals’ conception of social policy. 37
Now this idea of a social policy whose effects are entirely neutralized
from the economic point of view is already very clearly formulated right
at the start of the period in which the neo-liberal model was being set
up in France by the Finance Minister of the time, Giscard d’Estaing,
that is to say, in 1972. 38 In a paper from 1972, (in a colloquium orga-
nized by Stoléru), 39 he said: What is the economic function of the state,
of any modern state? It is, first, a relative redistribution of income,
* M.F.: that the redistributions, instead of going for the same wage7 March 1979
201
second, a subsidy in the form of the production of collective goods, and
third, a regulation of economic processes ensuring growth and full
employment. 40 These are the traditional objectives of French economic
policy which could still not be challenged at that time. However, what
he does challenge is the link between these three economic functions of
the state: redistribution, subsidy, and regulation. He draws attention to
the fact that the French budget is constructed in such a way that it is
quite possible to use the same sums of money for the construction of a
highway or for a specifically social type of subsidy. 41 This is intolerable,
he says. In a sound policy we should “completely separate that which
corresponds to the needs of economic expansion from that which corre-
sponds to the concern for solidarity and social justice.” 42 In other words,
we should have two systems that as far as possible are impermeable to
each other, two systems with two corresponding and completely distinct
types of taxation, an economic tax and a social tax. 43 Behind this state-
ment of principle you can see the major idea that the economy must have
its own rules and the social must have its specific objectives, but that
they must be decoupled so that the economic process is not disrupted or
damaged by social mechanisms and so that the social mechanism has a
limitation, a purity, as it were, such that it never intervenes in the
economic process as a disruption.
The problem is: How can we get such a separation between the eco-
nomic and the social to work? How can we carry out this decoupling?
Here again, still with Giscard’s text, we can see what he means. He
appeals to a principle I have already spoken about which is common to
German ordoliberalism and American neo-liberalism, and which is
found in French neo-liberalism. This is the idea that the economy is
basically a game, that it develops as a game between partners, that the
whole of society must be permeated by this economic game, and that the
essential role of the state is to define the economic rules of the game and
to make sure that they are in fact applied. What are these rules? They
must be such that the economic game is as active as possible and conse-
quently to the advantage of the greatest possible number of people, with
simply a rule—and this is the surface of contact, without real penetra-
tion, of the economic and the social—a supplementary and uncondi-
tional rule of the game, as it were, which is that it must be impossible202
t h e b i rt h o f b i o p o l i t i c s
for one of the partners of the economic game to lose everything and thus
be unable to continue playing. It is, if you like, a safety clause for the
player, a limiting rule that changes nothing in the course of the game
itself, but which prevents someone from ever dropping totally and
definitively out of the game. It is a sort of inverted social contract. That
is to say, in the social contract, all those who will the social contract and
virtually or actually subscribe to it form part of society until such a time
as they cut themselves off from it. In the idea of an economic game we
find that no one originally insisted on being part of the economic game
and consequently it is up to society and to the rules of the game imposed
by the state to ensure that no one is excluded from this game in which
he is caught up without ever having explicitly wished to take part. The
idea that the economy is a game, that there are rules of the economic
game guaranteed by the state, and that the only point of contact between
the economic and the social is the rule safeguarding players from being
excluded from the game, is formulated by Giscard somewhat implicitly,
but sufficiently clearly, I think, when he says in this 1972 text: “The
characteristic feature of the market economy is the existence of rules of
the game, which enable decentralized decisions to be taken, and that
these rules are the same for all.” 44 Between the rule of competition of
production and that of the protection of the individual, a “particular
game” must be established so that no player risks losing everything 45 —
he says “particular game,” but it would no doubt be better to say “par-
ticular rule.” Now this idea that there must be a rule of non-exclusion
and that the function of the social rule, of social regulation, or of social
security in the broadest sense of the term, is purely and simply to ensure
non-exclusion with regard to an economic game that, apart from this
rule, must follow its own course, is implemented, or outlined at any rate,
in a whole series of more or less clear measures.*
* Foucault here leaves out pages 20 and 21 of the manuscript:
“This decoupling and this economic game with a safety clause comprises two parts: 1. One
purely economic: re-establishing the game of the market without taking the protection of
individuals into account. And without having to pursue an economic policy which adopts the
objective of maintaining employment [and] maintaining purchase power ( ... ). 2. The other
part comprises two sets of measures: a. the reconstruction of ‘human capital’ ( ... ), b. the
negative tax (Chicago).”7 March 1979
203
Because time is pressing and also because I don’t want to bore you
too much with this, I would just like to show you what this means, not
[in terms of] the measures which were actually taken and which, due to
the crisis and its intensity, could not be fully followed through or form
a coherent whole, but [by taking] the example of a project which comes
back several times after 1974, which is that of the negative tax. In fact,
when Giscard said in 1972 that we must ensure that it never happens
that someone loses everything, he already had in mind this idea of a neg-
ative tax. The negative tax is not an idea of French neo-liberalism, but of
American neo-liberalism (which maybe I will talk about next week): it
is an idea, anyway, which was taken up by people around Giscard, like
Stoléru 46 and Stoffaës (who I will talk about shortly), and in the
preparatory discussions for the 7th Plan, in 1974 or ’75, 47 Stoffaës
produced a report on the negative tax. 48 What is the negative tax? To
summarize things very, very simply, we can say that the idea of negative
tax is the following: To be socially effective without being economically
disruptive, a social benefit must never, as far as this is possible, take the
form of collective consumption, for, the supporters of negative tax say,
experience shows that in the end it is the wealthiest who benefit most
from collective forms of consumption and who contribute the least in
financing them. So, if we want an effective social protection without
negative economic effects, we must quite simply replace those overall
forms of financing, all those more or less sectional benefits, with a cash
benefit which will guarantee supplementary resources to those, and
only those, who either definitively or provisionally fail to reach a suffi-
cient threshold. In clear terms, if you like, there is no point giving the
wealthy the possibility of sharing in collective consumptions of health;
they are perfectly capable of taking care of their own health. On the
other hand, there is a category of individuals in society who, either
definitively, because they are old or have a disability, or provisionally,
because they have lost their job and are unemployed, cannot reach what
society considers to be the proper level of consumption. Well, it is to
these and for their benefit only that we should allocate compensatory
benefits, the typical benefits of cover of a social policy. Consequently,
below a given level of income we will pay an additional amount, even if
this means giving up the idea that society as a whole owes services like204
t h e b i rt h o f b i o p o l i t i c s
health and education to each of its members, and even if also—and this
is no doubt the most important element—it means reintroducing an
imbalance between the poor and others, between those receiving aid and
those who are not.
Obviously, this project of a negative tax, especially in its French
forms, does not have the drastic appearance that I have just given, or the
simplistic appearance that you might think. In fact, negative tax as a
benefit paid to people with an income which is insufficient to ensure a
given level of consumption is conceived by Stoléru and Stoffaës in a rel-
atively sophisticated way inasmuch as, in particular, one has to ensure
that people do not take this supplementary benefit as a sort of means of
living that will save them from looking for work and getting back into
the economic game. A whole series of modulations and gradations see to
it that, through the negative tax, the individual will be guaranteed a
given level of consumption, but with enough motivations, or, if you like,
enough frustrations, so that he still always wants to work and so that it
is always preferable to work rather than receive a benefit. 49
Let’s leave aside all these details—which are important nevertheless.
I would just like to note a few things. First of all, what is it that will be
attenuated by the action which is explicitly sought after in the idea of a
negative tax? It is the effects of poverty, and only its effects. That is to
say, in no way does the negative tax seek to be an action aiming to mod-
ify this or that cause of poverty. The negative tax will never function at
the level of the causes of poverty but simply at the level of its effects.
This is what Stoléru says when he writes: “For some, social assistance
must be motivated by the causes of poverty,” and thus what it covers,
what it is directed towards, is illness, accidents, unfitness for work, or
the impossibility of finding employment. That is to say, in this tradi-
tional perspective, you cannot give someone assistance without asking
why he needs it and so without seeking to change the reasons for which
he needs it. “For others,” those who support the negative tax, “social
assistance must only be motivated by the effects of poverty; every human
being,” Stoléru says, “has basic needs, and society must help him to meet
them when he cannot do so by himself.” 50 So that when it comes to it, the
famous distinction that Western governmentality has tried for so long to
establish between the good and bad poor, between the voluntary and7 March 1979
205
involuntary unemployed, is not important. After all, it does not and
should not concern us to know why someone falls below the level of the
social game; whether he is a drug addict or voluntarily unemployed is
not important. Whatever the reasons, the only problem is whether he is
above or below the threshold. The only thing that matters is that the
individual has fallen below a given level and, at that point, without
looking further, and so without having to make all those bureaucratic,
police, or inquisitorial investigations, the problem becomes one of
granting him a subsidy in such a way that the mechanism by which he
is given it still encourages him to rise again to the level of the threshold
and be sufficiently motivated, through receiving assistance, to have the
desire, in spite of everything, to rise again above the threshold. But if he
does not have the desire, this is not important and he will remain
assisted. This is the first point which is, I think, very important in rela-
tion to what was developed for centuries by social policy in the West.
Second, you can see that this negative tax is a way of absolutely avoid-
ing social policy having any kind effect in the form of a general redistri-
bution of income, that is to say, broadly speaking, anything that could
be described as a socialist policy. If we call socialist policy a policy of
“relative”* poverty, that is to say, a policy which tends to alter the gaps
between different incomes, if we understand socialist policy as a policy
that tries to attenuate the effects of relative poverty arising from the gap
between the incomes of the wealthiest and the poorest, then it is
absolutely clear that the policy entailed by negative tax is the exact
opposite of socialist policy. Relative poverty does not figure in any way
in the objectives of such a social policy. The only problem is “absolute” †
poverty, that is to say the threshold below which people are deemed not
to have an adequate income for ensuring that they have a sufficient
consumption. 51
I think we should make a few remarks about absolute poverty. It
should not be understood, of course, as a sort of threshold valid for the
whole of humanity. Absolute poverty is relative for every society, and
there are societies which will have a fairly high threshold of absolute
* In inverted commas in the manuscript (p. 25).
†
In inverted commas in the manuscript (p. 25).206
t h e b i rt h o f b i o p o l i t i c s
poverty and other, poor societies where it will be much lower. So, the
threshold of absolute poverty is relative. Second, and this is an impor-
tant consequence, you can see that this reintroduces that category of the
poor and of poverty that all social policies, certainly since Liberation,
but in reality all the policies of welfare, all the more or less socializing or
socialized policies since the end of the nineteenth century, tried to get
rid of. All these policies—the German state socialist type of policy, a
welfare policy like that programmed by Pigou, 52 the New Deal policy,
and social policy like that in England or France after Liberation—did
not want to know the category of the poor, or, at any rate, they wanted
to ensure that economic interventions were such that the population
was not divided between the poor and the less poor. Policy was always
situated in the spread of relative poverty, in the redistribution of
incomes, in the play of the gap between richer and poorer. Here, how-
ever, we have a policy defining a given threshold which is still relative,
but which is absolute for the society and which distinguishes between
the poor and those who are not poor, between those who are receiving
assistance and those who are not.
The third characteristic of negative tax is that, as you can see, it
ensures as it were a general security, but at the lowest level, that is to say,
the economic mechanisms of the game, the mechanisms of competition
and enterprise, will be allowed to function in the rest of society. Above
the threshold everyone will have to be an enterprise for himself or for
his family. A society formalized on the model of the enterprise, of the
competitive enterprise, will be possible above the threshold, and there
will be simply a minimum security, that is to say, the nullification of
certain risks on the basis of a low level threshold. That is to say, there
will be a population which, from the point of view of the economic
baseline, will be constantly moving between, on the one hand, assistance
provided in certain eventualities when it falls below the threshold and,
on the other, both its use and its availability for use according to eco-
nomic needs and possibilities. It will therefore be a kind of infra- and
supra-liminal floating population, a liminal population which, for an
economy that has abandoned the objective of full employment, will be a
constant reserve of manpower which can be drawn on if need be, but
which can also be returned to its assisted status if necessary.7 March 1979
207
So with this system—which, again, has not been applied for a num-
ber of reasons, but whose features are clearly visible in the current eco-
nomic policy of Giscard and Barre—you have the formation of an
economic policy which is no longer focused on full employment, and
which can only be integrated in the general market economy by
abandoning the objective of full employment along with its essential
instrument of centrally planned growth. Full employment and volun-
tarist growth are renounced in favor of integration in a market economy.
But this entails a fund of a floating population, of a liminal, infra- or
supra-liminal population, in which the assurance mechanism will
enable each to live, after a fashion, and to live in such a way that he can
always be available for possible work, if market conditions require it.
This is a completely different system from that through which eigh-
teenth and nineteenth century capitalism was formed and developed,
when it had to deal with a peasant population which was a possible con-
stant reservoir of manpower. When the economy functions as it does
now, when the peasant population can no longer ensure that kind of
endless fund of manpower, this fund has to be formed in a completely
different way. This other way is the assisted population, which is actu-
ally assisted in a very liberal and much less bureaucratic and disciplinary
way than it is by a system focused on full employment which employs
mechanisms like those of social security. Ultimately, it is up to people to
work if they want or not work if they don’t. Above all there is the pos-
sibility of not forcing them to work if there is no interest in doing so.
They are merely guaranteed the possibility of minimal existence at a
given level, and in this way the neo-liberal policy can be got to work.
Now this kind of project is nothing other than the radicalization of
those general themes I talked about with regard to ordoliberalism. The
German ordoliberals explained that the main objective of a social policy
is certainly not to take into account all the risks that may be incurred by
the global mass of the population, and that a true social policy must be
such that, without affecting the economic game, and consequently let-
ting society develop as an enterprise society, mechanisms of intervention
are deployed to assist those when, and only when, they need it.208
t h e b i rt h o f b i o p o l i t i c s
1. See above, lecture of 10 January 1979, note 17.
2. Foucault had already expressed himself on this subject, in terms close to these, in November
1977, in his interview with R. Lefort with regard to the Croissant affair (see Sécurité,
Territoire, Population, “Situation des cours,” p. 385; Security, Territory, Population, “Course
context,” pp. 372–373), contrasting the argument of the state’s tendency to fascism with the
analysis of real problems raised by “security societies” (“Michel Foucault: la sécurité et
l’État,” Dits et Écrits, 3, p. 387).
3. Reference to a conversation in which F. Ewald, then Foucault’s assistant at the Collège de
France, contrasted denunciation with accusation, the former being made in the same name
as the principles it denounces and thereby being doomed to remain abstract, while the lat-
ter, directed at someone by name, involves much greater commitment on the part of the
person who formulates it (information supplied by F. Ewald).
4. W. Röpke, “Das Beveridgeplan,” (see above, lecture of 7 February 1979, note 39).
5. The sentence is actually taken from Civitas Humana, pp 146–147: “Still more social insurance,
a still larger social bureaucracy, still more of pushing incomes about hither and thither, yet more labels
and more stamps, yet further concentration of power, national income and responsibility in the hands
of the state which is seeking to encompass, regulate, concentrate and control everything, and all this
with the certainty of not effecting any solution of the problem of proletarianisation but of
achieving the destruction of the middle classes and thus adding still further to the cen-
tralised and state manufactured proletariat.” In his notes, Foucault notes the “more detailed
critique” developed in the article cited, but he does not refer to it directly. Röpke devotes
pages 226–243 of his book to the critique of the Beveridge plan and specifies in a note on
p. 245: “I have dwelt at greater length on this subject elsewhere [followed by a reference to
the article ‘Das Beveridgeplan’],” adding: “But on this subject one should above all refer to
the excellent work of the Catholic sociologist (formerly German and today teaching in the
United States), Goetz Briefs, The Proletariat, New York, 1937).”
6. F. Hayek, The Road to Serfdom, p. 1.
7. Ibid. p. 2: “It is not to the Germany of Hitler, the Germany of the present war, that this
country bears yet any resemblance. But students of the currents of ideas can hardly fail to
see that there is more than a superficial similarity between the trend of thought in
Germany during and after the last war and the present current of ideas in this country.
There exists now in this country certainly the same determination that the organisation of
the nation we have achieved for purposes of defence shall be retained for the purposes of
creation.”
8. Ibid. p. 3: “Few are ready to recognise that the rise of Fascism and Nazism was not a reac-
tion against the socialist trends of the preceding period, but a necessary outcome of those
tendencies.”
9. See above, lecture of 7 February 1979, pp. 110–111, where he sets out the same arguments
for Röpke in 1943.
10. In fact, in 1980 Foucault takes a completely different direction and, taking up again the
theme of the 1978 lectures, devotes his lectures (“On the Government of the Living”)
to the problem of the examination of conscience and confession (l’aveu) in early
Christianity. See the course summary, Dits et Écrits, 4, pp. 125–129; English translation
by Robert Hurley, “The Government of the Living” in Essential Works of Foucault, 1,
pp. 81–85.
11. This was the thesis of the leftists of the Gauche Prolétarienne. See Les Temps Modernes, 310
bis: Nouveau Fascisme, Nouvelle Démocratie, 1972. But Foucault’s remark is especially con-
nected to the debates taking place about Germany regarding terrorism. Police repression of
the Red Army Fraction intensified after the assassination in October 1977 of the president
of the employers’ association, H.M. Schleyer, by members of the group. Baader and several
of his fellow prisoners were found dead in their cells in the Stammheim prison in Stuttgart
some days later. The official thesis of suicide was violently challenged. Foucault, while sup-
porting the Red Army Fraction’s lawyer, Klaus Croissant, against the threat of extradition
from France, had broken with those who, seeing Helmut Schmidt’s Germany as a state
which was becoming fascist, were giving support to the terrorist struggle. See, “Va-t-on7 March 1979
12.
13.
14.
15.
16.
17.
18.
19.
20.
21.
209
extrader Klauss Croissant?” Dits et Écrits, 3, pp. 361–365, where no doubt for the first time
he theorizes the “right of the governed ( ... ) more precise and more historically determi-
nate than human rights” (p. 362). On Foucault’s attitude to the “German question,” see,
“Situation des cours,” in Sécurité, Territoire, Population, pp. 386–387; “Course context,” in
Security, Territory, Population, pp. 373–374.
Richard Nixon (1913–1994), President of the United States, 1968 to 1974.
James Earl (“Jimmy”) Carter (born 1924), President of the United States, 1976 to 1980.
Raymond Barre (born 1924), professor of economic sciences, director of the office of the
Minister of Industry Jean-Marcel Jeannenay, then European commissioner at Brussels from
July 1967 to December 1972, was Prime Minister from August 1976 until May 1981 and
also Economic and Finance Minister from August 1976 until April 1978. On 22 September
1976 he put forward a plan of austerity measures, afterwards called the “Barre plan,” to
combat the “stagflation” (weak growth and strong inflation) which appeared with the
1974 crisis. For the principles inspiring this policy of a struggle against inflation, see
R. Barre, Une politique pour l’Avenir (Paris: Plon, pp. 24–27). See also in this volume
(pp. 98–114) the reproduction of an interview with Jean Boissonnat, which appeared in
l’Epansion in September 1978, “Dialogue sur le libéralisme,” in which, after rejecting the
diagnosis of a crisis of liberalism as well as, to his eyes, the outmoded opposition between
liberalism and interventionism, Barre states: “If by economic liberalism you understand the
doctrine of ‘laissez faire—laissez passer,’ then I am certainly not a liberal. If by economic
liberalism you understand the decentralized management of a modern economy, which
combines both the freedom, coupled with responsibility, of private centers of decision-
making, and also the regulatory intervention of the state, then you could say I am a liberal”
(pp. 105–106). Going on to state the principles which, according to him, should inspire
the management of a modern economy—the free choice of economic agents and state
responsibility for the overall regulation of economic activity, for maintaining competition,
correcting effects of the market on employment, and for the equitable redistribution of
incomes—he concludes: “That is my liberalism; it is not that different from what social
democratic governments think and do” (p. 107). He then makes an explicit reference to the
“social market economy,” the results of which he defends against criticisms from the
Chicago School: “( ... ) the exaggerated liberalism of the Chicago school cannot inspire an
effective policy” (p. 108).
C. Stoffaës, La Grande Menace industrielle (Paris: Calmann-Lévy, 1978; enlarged 2nd edition,
Le Livre de poche, 1979 [edition quoted here]). This book, which caused a big stir, is an
extension of that by L. Stoléru, L’Impératif industriel (Paris: Le Seuil, 1969). “Only a new
industrial imperative, a replica of the imperative of industrialization launched ten years ago,
will enable this great danger [of the developing third world and super-industrialized coun-
tries] to be confronted” p. 48.
Born in 1947, a student of the École polytechnique and the École des mines, with a
degree from Harvard, Christain Stoffaës was professor of industrial economics at the
Institut d’études politiques in Paris and then, from 1978, director of the Centre d’études
et de prévision created by André Giraud, Minister for Industry.
C. Stoffaës, La Grande Menace, 4th edition, cover: “Rejecting the temptation to hurriedly
transpose the German and Japanese models, the author sets out the bases for an original
industrial policy to meet the challenge confronting our country: the future of the French
economy.”
Ibid. pp. 742–743 (emphasis by C. Stoffaës).
Ibid. p. 743 (immediately after the previous quotation): “If we want the laws of the mar-
ket to restore vigor to the economic sphere, then at the same time imagination must take
back power in the collective sphere. Contrary to what is too often said, there is no incom-
patibility between an effective market economy open to the world and an advanced social
project that would proceed faster in reducing inequalities of fortunes, incomes, and oppor-
tunities and above all in redistributing power in the enterprise and in public life.”
Valéry Giscard d’Estaing: minister of finance and the economy from 1962 until 1966,
under President de Gaul, and from 1969 until 1974, under President Georges Pompidou;
President of the Republic from May 1974.
See above, lecture of 10 January 1979, p. 12.210
t h e b i rt h o f b i o p o l i t i c s
22. On the 5th Plan (1965–1970), see Rapport sur les options principales du V e Plan de développe-
ment économique et social (Paris: La Documentation française, 1964). See, A. Gauron, Histoire
économique et sociale de la V e République, vol. 1; Le Temps des modernistes (1958–1969) (Paris:
La Découverte/Maspero, 1983) pp. 85–94: “The 5th Plan or the imperative of concentra-
tion.” “In a market economy oriented by the plan, the report of the 5th Plan notes, the pri-
mary responsibility for industrial development falls to the heads of enterprises. The success
of the policy, whose objectives and means are decided by the Plan, depends on their initia-
tive.” But, the Plan commissioner says, it would be “contrary to prudence to hand the econ-
omy over to a laisser-faire whose consequences could not be calculated or, if need be,
modified.” (Rapport sur les options principales du V e Plan, p. 72, quoted by A. Guaron, p. 87,
who adds: “The general commissioner of the Plan does not therefore advocate a new form
of the ‘mixed economy’: the complementarity between plan and market recognizes and
organizes the preeminence of the laws of the market over the plan’s objectives, and there-
fore of capitalist decisions over governmental policy. It suggests, in still covert terms, that
this presupposes a profound transformation of the mode of state intervention ( ... ).”) On
the economic and social objectives of the four previous plans since the war, see, for exam-
ple, P. Massé, Le Plan, ou l’Anti-hasard (Paris: Gallimard, 1965) pp. 146–151; P. Bauchet, La
Planification française du premier au sixième plan (Paris: Le Seuil, 1970 [5th edition]).
23. Antoine Pinay (1891–1994), was president of the Cabinet, with the Finance portfolio,
from March to December 1942. During this short period he successfully devoted himself to
the stabilization of the franc and faced up to the social malaise with various measures of
stabilization.
24. On 10 June 1958, Jacques Rueff sent a note to Antoine Pinay, minister of Finance and
Economic affairs appointed by General de Gaulle, with the title, “Elements for a program
of economic and financial renewal” in which he advocated the “restoration of a French cur-
rency,” in accordance with his doctrine of the financial order, with a view to combating
inflation. In spite of Pinay’s reservations, this note served as the basis for the creation of a
committee of experts that met from September to December 1958, under the presidency of
Rueff, and presented a major austerity plan, supported by De Gaulle, which was adopted
by the Cabinet at the end of December. The plan included three fundamental decisions: “a
vigorous devaluation, increased taxation, the liberalization of foreign exchange”
(J. Lacouture, De Gaulle [Paris: Le Seuil, 1985] vol. 2, p. 672).
25. Created by the provisional government of the French Republic (ruling of 4 October 1945),
in conformity with the commitment of the National Council of the Resistance (CNR,
Conseil national de la Résistance, of which A. Parodi, Minister of Labor in 1945, was a mem-
ber), Social Security had the task of “ridding workers of the uncertainty of the morrow”
that generates a “feeling of inferiority” and is a “real and profound basis of class distinc-
tions.” The ruling was followed by a series of laws up until May 1946. On the genesis of
the French social security plan, see H.C. Galant, Histoire politique de la Sécurité sociale:
1945–1952, with a Preface by P. Laroque (Paris: Hachette, 1974 [reproduction of this
edition, Paris: A. Colin, 1955]); N. Kerschen, “L’influence du rapport Beveridge sur le
plan français de sécurité sociale de 1945.” On the social program of the CNR, see above,
lecture of 31 January, 1979, note 15.
26. Pierre Laroque (1907–1997): Jurist, specialist in labor law. A member of the Council of
State, director general of social insurance at the Ministry of Labor, in September 1944 he
was directed by A. Parodi to work out the plan of social security. He presided over the his-
tory panel of Social Security from 1973 until 1989. See, Revue française des affaires sociales,
special issue: Quarante ans de Sécurité sociale, July-September 1985. He presided over the
social section of the Council of State from 1964 until 1980.
27. P. Laroque, “La Sécurité sociale dans l’économie française,” lecture delivered at the Club
“Échos” on Saturday 6 November 1948 (Paris: Fédération nationale des organismes de
sécurité sociale, [no date]), pp. 3–22.
28. Ibid. pp. 15–16: “We frequently talk of the costs, but rarely of the contribution of Social
Security to the economy. This contribution is not negligible however. Every manufacturer
thinks it normal and necessary to add to his receipts the sums that are indispensable for the
maintenance of his material. Now to a very considerable extent, Social Security represents
the maintenance of the human capital of the country. ( ... ) our economy needs and will7 March 1979
29.
30.
31.
32.
33.
34.
35.
36.
37.
38.
39.
211
increasingly need manpower. ( ... ) This is one of the essential tasks of Social Security: to
supply the French economy with men. Social Security is thus an essential factor in the
conservation and development of the workforce and in this respect its importance for the
country’s economy is undeniable.”
Ibid. p. 6: “Social Security appears to us therefore as the guarantee that, whatever the
circumstances, everyone will be able to support himself and those for whom he is responsible in
reasonable conditions.” This principle was formulated by P. Laroque in 1946 (“Le plan
français de sécurité sociale,” Revue française du travail, 1, 1946, p. 9) and repeated in the
same terms in 1948 (“De l’assurance sociale à la sécurité sociale: l’expérience française,”
Revue internationale du travail, 56 (6), 1948, p. 621). See N. Kerschen, “L’influence du
rapport Beveridge,” p. 577.
P. Laroque, “La Sécurité sociale dans l’économie française,” p. 17: “( ... ) the increase of
social security contributions has been imposed entirely on wages, and ( ... ) has not by
itself put any pressure on the cost prices of the economy. In reality, Social Security is con-
fined to the redistribution of a fraction of the mass of wage-earners’ incomes. ( ... ) We are
faced with a solidarity imposed on the mass of wage-earners, to the advantage of their
children and the aged.”
Ibid.: “We can even go further and claim without paradox that Social Security has made
possible a reduction of the costs that weigh on the country’s economy, by avoiding wage
increases that without it might have been significant and difficult to avoid.”
Revue française des affaires sociales, special issue: Perspectives de la sécurité sociale, July-
September 1976. This is actually a set of reports drafted by the ENA students (promoted
by GUERNICA) within the framework of their seminars, each seminar conceived of as
“the multi-disciplinary study of an administrative problem with a view to finding an
‘operational’ solution” (G. Dupuis, ibid. p. iv). In this paragraph Foucault relies on the
first report, “Le financement du régime générale de sécurité sociale,” written by P. Begault,
A. Bodon, B. Bonnet, J.-C. Bugeat, G. Chabost, D. Demangel, J.-M. Grabarsky,
P. Masseron, B. Pommies, D. Postel-Vinnay, E. Rigal, and C. Vallet (pp. 5–66).
Foucault summarizes here, leaving out all the technical features of the analysis developed in
the second section of the report (“The current mode of financing the general regime is not
neutral with regard to economic activity”), pp. 21–27. Paragraph 2.3, “The impact of con-
tributions on employment,” concludes with these words: “The wage basis and upper limit
to contributions thus seems unfavorable to employment in the short term.”
Ibid., paragraph 2.4. pp. 24–27: “The impact of contributions on international competi-
tion.” The report, however, although it emphasizes that “the distortions produced in inter-
national competition by different systems of financing social expenditure may compromise
the competitiveness of French industry” (p. 26), notes that “these distortions are more
than compensated for by two elements [the relative weakness of social expenditure and the
level of wages in France]” and concludes: “In the final analysis, it does not seem therefore
that the competitiveness of French enterprises is weakened by the size of the social costs
they carry; and breaches of neutrality in international competition resulting from the pre-
sent system of financing social security are sufficiently compensated for and, on their own,
do not justify a reform of the system.”
Ibid., paragraph 3, pp. 28–34: “The present way of financing the general regime aggravates
income inequalities between different categories of wage-earners.”
Ibid., p. 21: “The deduction carried out to finance the general regime exceeds 12% of the
GDP and by this fact alone has economic consequences. Now, the objective of Social
Security is not an economic objective, and the ways in which it is financed should not, by
distorting the law of the market, be an element of economic policy. Social Security must
remain neutral in this respect.”
See above, lecture of 14 January 1979.
See above, this lecture, note 20.
Économie et Société humaine. Rencontres internationales du ministère de l’Économie et des Finances
(Paris, 20–22 juin 1972), Preface by V. Giscard d’Estaing, presentation by L. Stoléru (Paris:
Denoël, 1972). Lionel Stoléru (born 1937) was then technical advisor to the Cabinet of
Valéry Giscard d’Estaing. Foucault met him quite often.212
t h e b i rt h o f b i o p o l i t i c s
40. Ibid., p. 445: “( ... ) for a long time economists have divided the diversity of the functions
of the state into three categories:
(1) The function of redistribution: the state transfers from the wealthiest to the
poorest;
(2) The function of subsidy: the state produces collective goods: education, health care,
highways;
(3) The function of regulation: the state regulates and supports growth and full
employment through its economic policy.”
41. Ibid., continuing from the previous quotation: “Now, if these three functions are really dis-
tinct on the intellectual level, they are not distinct in practice: the same tax equally finances
highways and Social Security deficits, the same expenditure serves both to produce in order
to expand the national rail network and to subsidize the many families who travel by
train.”
42. Ibid., continuing from the previous quotation: “I wonder if this mixture of kinds is in con-
formity with social justice and I would like to submit a personal idea for you to reflect on:
Should we not separate that which corresponds to the needs of economic expansion from
that which arises from the concern for solidarity and social justice?”
43. Ibid., continuing from the previous quotation: “Can we devise a system in which every
citizen would pay his taxes in two distinct forms: the economic tax and the social tax?”
44. Ibid. p. 439: “That characteristic feature of the market economy is above all:
—that there are rules of the game that enable decentralized decisions to be taken,
—that these rules are the same for all.”
45. Ibid., p. 444: “( ... ) there would remain for many years a confrontation between the mech-
anism of production and the mechanism of individual protection: this means that the state
will have to ensure the arbitration between these two mechanisms and that it will have
increasingly to intervene, not in a bureaucratic manner, but in order to fix the rules of a
rather particular game, since there must be no risk of any of the players losing.”
46. After being technical advisor at the Ministry of Finance from 1969 to 1974 (see above, this
lecture, note 39), Lionel Stoléru was an economic advisor at the Élysée from 1974 to 1976.
From 1978 he was Secretary of State for the Minister of Labor and participation (manual
labor and immigration).
47. The 7th Plan corresponds to the years 1976–1980.
48. C. Stoffaës, “Rapport du groupe d’étude de l’impôt négatif. Commissariat du Plan,” Paris,
1973–1974; “De l’impôt négatif sur le revenu,” Contrepoint, 11, 1973; L. Stoléru, “Coût et
efficacité de l’impôt négatif,” Revue économique, October, 1974; Vaincre la pauvreté dans les
pays riches (Paris: Flammarion, 1977), 2nd part, pp. 117–209: “L’impôt négatif, simple
remède ou panacée?” On this subject see, H. Lepage, Demain le capitalisme, pp. 280–283:
“The theory of the negative tax on income is simple: it involves defining a threshold of poverty
as far as annual incomes are concerned, in terms of the size of the family (a single person or
a household with children), and paying an allowance to families falling below the poverty
line, enabling them to make good the gap. In other words, it is a system of a minimum income
guaranteed by the community” (p. 280, note 1). The negative tax was again the object of debate
within the Left under the government of Lionel Jospin in 2000–2001. See, for example,
D. Cohen, “Impôt négatif: le mot et la chose,” Le Monde, 6 Febrary 2001.
49. See L. Stoléru, Vaincre la pauvreté, pp. 138–146: “Encouragements to work: how to discour-
age idleness?” and p. 206: “Apart from any other administrative addition, the system of
negative tax is concerned with discouraging idleness through its rate. The encouragement
consists in ensuring that everyone always has an interest in working, and in working more,
in order to improve his final income, which is the sum of his earnings and the benefit he
receives. This encouragement is all the stronger in that the benefit diminishes more slowly
than the increase in earnings, that is to say, the rate of taxation is lower.”
50. L. Stoléru, ibid., p. 242; see also pp. 205–206: “Negative tax is ( ... ) totally incompatible
with the social conceptions that want to know why there is poverty before providing assis-
tance. ( ... ) Acceptance of the negative tax is therefore acceptance of a universalist concep-
tion of poverty based upon the necessity of coming to the assistance of those who are poor
without seeking to know where the fault lies, that is to say based upon the situation and
not on the origin.”7 March 1979
213
51. See, ibid., pp. 23–24: “In the first case [i.e., that of absolute poverty], we will speak of a ‘vital
minimum,’ of a level of subsistence, of a typical budget, of elementary needs ( ... ). In the
second case [i.e., that of relative poverty], we will talk of the gap between the poor and the
rich, of the breadth of the range of incomes, of the hierarchy of earnings, and of the disparities
in access to collective goods, we will measure coefficients of the inequality of income distri-
bution.” See also, pp. 241–242; 292: “The border between absolute poverty and relative
poverty is the border between capitalism and socialism.”
52. See above, lecture of 14 February 1979, note 45.This page intentionally left blanknine
14 March 1979
[ ]
American neo-liberalism (I). Its context. ⵑ The difference between
American and European neo-liberalism. ⵑ American
neo-liberalism as a global claim, utopian focus, and method of
thought. ⵑ Aspects of this neo-liberalism: (1) The theory of human
capital. The two processes that it represents: (a) an extension of
economic analysis within its own domain: criticism of the classical
analysis of labor in terms of the time factor; (b) an extension of
economic analysis to domains previously considered to be
non-economic. ⵑ The epistemological transformation produced by
neo-liberal analysis: from the analysis of economic processes to the
analysis of the internal rationality of human behavior. ⵑ Work as
economic conduct. ⵑ Its division into capital, abilities, and income.
ⵑ The redefinition of homo œconomicus as entrepreneur of
himself. ⵑ The notion of “human capital.” Its constitutive elements:
(a) innate elements and the question of the improvement of genetic
human capital; (b) acquired elements and the problem of the formation
of human capital (education, health, etcetera). ⵑ The interest of
these analyses: resumption of the problem of social and economic
innovation (Schumpeter). A new conception of the policy of growth.
TODAY* I WOULD LIKE to start talking to you about what is becoming
a pet theme in France: American neo-liberalism. 1 Obviously, I will only
* At the beginning of the lecture Foucault announces that he “will have to leave at eleven
o’clock, because [he has] a meeting.”216
t h e b i rt h o f b i o p o l i t i c s
consider some aspects and those that may have some relevance for the
kind of analysis I am suggesting. 2
Naturally, we will start with some banalities. American neo-liberalism
developed in a context not that different from the contexts in which
German neo-liberalism and what we could call French neo-liberalism
developed. That is to say, the three main contextual elements of the
development of neo-liberalism were, first: the New Deal and criticism of
the New Deal and what we can broadly call the Keynesian policy devel-
oped by Roosevelt from 1933–34. The first, fundamental text of this
American neo-liberalism, written in 1934 by Simons, 3 who was the
father of the Chicago School, is an article entitled “A Positive Program
for Laissez-Faire.” 4
The second contextual element is of course the Beveridge plan and all
the projects of economic and social interventionism developed during
the war. 5 These are all important elements that we could call, if you like,
pacts of war, that is to say, pacts in terms of which governments—
basically the English, and to a certain extent the American government—
said to people who had just been through a very serious economic and
social crisis: Now we are asking you to get yourselves killed, but we
promise you that when you have done this, you will keep your jobs until
the end of your lives. It would be very interesting to study this set of
documents, analyses, programs, and research for itself, because it seems
to me that, if I am not mistaken, this is the first time that entire nations
waged war on the basis of a system of pacts which were not just interna-
tional alliances between powers, but social pacts of a kind that
promised—to those who were asked to go to war and get themselves
killed—a certain type of economic and social organization which assured
security (of employment, with regard to illness and other kinds of risk,
and at the level of retirement): they were pacts of security at the
moment of a demand for war. The demand for war on the part of gov-
ernments is accompanied—and very quickly; there are texts on the
theme from 1940—by this offer of a social pact and security. It was
against this set of social problems that Simons drafted a number of crit-
ical texts and articles, the most interesting of which is entitled: “The
Beveridge Program: an unsympathetic interpretation,” which there is no
need to translate, since the title indicates its critical sense. 614 March 1979
217
The third contextual element was obviously all the programs on
poverty, education, and segregation developed in America from the
Truman 7 administration up to the Johnson 8 administration, and
through these programs, of course, state interventionism and the growth
of the federal administration, etcetera.
I think these three elements—Keynesian policy, social pacts of war,
and the growth of the federal administration through economic and
social programs—together formed the adversary and target of neo-
liberal thought, that which it was constructed against or which it
opposed in order to form itself and develop. You can see that this is
clearly the same type of context as that which we find in France, for
example, where neo-liberalism defined itself through opposition to the
Popular Front, 9 post-war Keynesian policies, [and] planning.
Nevertheless, I think there are some major differences between
European and American neo-liberalism. They are also very obvious, as
we know. I will just recall them. In the first place, American liberalism,
at the moment of its historical formation, that is to say, very early on,
from the eighteenth century, did not present itself, as in France, as a
moderating principle with regard to a pre-existing raison d’État, since
liberal type claims, and essentially economic claims moreover, were pre-
cisely the historical starting point for the formation of American inde-
pendence. 10 That is to say, liberalism played a role in America during the
period of the War of Independence somewhat analogous to the role it
played in Germany in 1948: liberalism was appealed to as the founding
and legitimizing principle of the state. The demand for liberalism
founds the state rather then the state limiting itself through liberalism.
I think this is one of the features of American liberalism.
Second, for two centuries—whether the issue has been one of economic
policy, protectionism, the problem of gold and silver, or bimetallism,
the question of slavery, the problem of the status and function of the
judicial system, or the relation between individuals and different states,
and between different states and the federal state—liberalism has, of
course, always been at the heart of all political debate in America. We
can say that the question of liberalism has been the recurrent element of
all the political discussions and choices of the United States. Let’s say
that whereas in Europe the recurrent elements of political debate in the218
t h e b i rt h o f b i o p o l i t i c s
nineteenth century were either the unity of the nation, or its indepen-
dence, or the Rule of law, in the United States it was liberalism.
Finally, third, in relation to this permanent ground of liberal debate,
non-liberalism—by which I mean interventionist policies, whether in
the form of Keynesian style economics, planning, or economic and social
programs—appeared, especially from the middle of the twentieth cen-
tury, as something extraneous and threatening inasmuch as it involved
both introducing objectives which could be described as socializing and
also as laying the bases of an imperialist and military state. Criticism of
this non-liberalism was thus able to find a double foothold: on the right,
precisely in the name of a liberal tradition historically and economically
hostile to anything sounding socialist, and on the left, inasmuch as it
was a question not only of criticism but also of daily struggle against the
development of an imperialist and military state. Hence the ambiguity,
or what appears to be an ambiguity in American neo-liberalism, since it
is brought into play and reactivated both by the right and the left.
Anyway, I think we can say that for all these completely banal reasons
I have just mentioned, American liberalism is not—as it is in France at
present, or as it was in Germany immediately after the war—just an eco-
nomic and political choice formed and formulated by those who govern
and within the governmental milieu. Liberalism in America is a whole
way of being and thinking. It is a type of relation between the governors
and the governed much more than a technique of governors with regard
to the governed. Let’s say, if you like, that whereas in a country like
France disputes between individuals and the state turn on the problem
of service, of public service, [in the United States] disputes between
individuals and government look like the problem of freedoms. I think
this is why American liberalism currently appears not just, or not so
much as a political alternative, but let’s say as a sort of many-sided,
ambiguous, global claim with a foothold in both the right and the left.
It is also a sort of utopian focus which is always being revived. It is also
a method of thought, a grid of economic and sociological analysis. I will
refer to someone who is not an American exactly, he is an Austrian
whom I have spoken about several times, but who then lived in England
and the United States before returning to Germany. Some years ago
Hayek said: We need a liberalism that is a living thought. Liberalism has14 March 1979
219
always left it to the socialists to produce utopias, and socialism owes
much of its vigor and historical dynamism to this utopian or utopia-
creating activity. Well, liberalism also needs utopia. It is up to us to cre-
ate liberal utopias, to think in a liberal mode, rather than presenting
liberalism as a technical alternative for government. 11 Liberalism must be
a general style of thought, analysis, and imagination.
These then, baldly stated, are some of the general features that may
enable us to make a bit of a distinction between American neo-liberalism
and the neo-liberalism that we have seen implemented in Germany and
France. It is precisely through this mode of thought, style of analysis, and
this grid of historical and sociological decipherment that I would like to
bring out some aspects of American neo-liberalism, it being understood
that I have no desire and it is not possible to study it in all its dimen-
sions. In particular, I would like to consider two elements which are at
once methods of analysis and types of programming, and which seem to
me to be interesting in this American neo-liberal conception: first, the
theory of human capital, and second, for reasons you will be able to
guess, of course, the problem of the analysis of criminality and
delinquency.
First, the theory of human capital. 12 I think the interest of this theory
of human capital is that it represents two processes, one that we could
call the extension of economic analysis into a previously unexplored
domain, and second, on the basis of this, the possibility of giving a
strictly economic interpretation of a whole domain previously thought
to be non-economic.
First, an extension of economic analysis within, as it were, its own
domain, but precisely on a point where it had remained blocked or at
any rate suspended. In effect, the American neo-liberals say this: It is
strange that classical political economy has always solemnly declared
that the production of goods depends on three factors—land, capital,
and labor—while leaving the third unexplored. It has remained, in a
way, a blank sheet on which the economists have written nothing. Of
course, we can say that Adam Smith’s economics does begin with a
reflection on labor, inasmuch as for Smith the division of labor and its
specification is the key which enabled him to construct his economic
analysis. 13 But apart from this sort of first step, this first opening, and220
t h e b i rt h o f b i o p o l i t i c s
since that moment, classical political economy has never analyzed labor
itself, or rather it has constantly striven to neutralize it, and to do this
by reducing it exclusively to the factor of time. This is what Ricardo did
when, wishing to analyze the nature of the increase of labor, the labor
factor, he only ever defined this increase in a quantitative way according
to the temporal variable. That is to say, he thought that the increase or
change of labor, the growth of the labor factor, could be nothing other
than the presence of an additional number of workers on the market,
that is to say, the possibility of employing more hours of labor thus
made available to capital. 14 Consequently there is a neutralization of the
nature itself of labor, to the advantage of this single quantitative variable
of hours of work and time, and basically classical economics never got
out of this Ricardian reduction of the problem of labor to the simple
analysis of the quantitative variable of time. 15 And then we find an
analysis, or rather non-analysis of labor in Keynes which is not so dif-
ferent or any more developed than Ricardo’s analysis. What is labor
according to Keynes? It is a factor of production, a productive factor,
but which in itself is passive and only finds employment, activity, and
actuality thanks to a certain rate of investment, and on condition clearly
that this is sufficiently high. 16 Starting from this criticism of classical
economics and its analysis of labor, the problem for the neo-liberals is
basically that of trying to introduce labor into the field of economic
analysis. A number of them attempted this, the first being Theodore
Schultz, 17 who published a number of articles in the years 1950–1960
the result of which was a book published in 1971 with the title Investment
in Human Capital. 18 More or less at the same time, Gary Becker 19 pub-
lished a book with the same title, 20 and then there is a third text by
Mincer, 21 which is quite fundamental and more concrete and precise
than the others, on the school and wages, which appeared in 1975. 22
In truth, the charge made by neo-liberalism that classical economics
forgets labor and has never subjected it to economic analysis may seem
strange when we think that, even if it is true that Ricardo entirely
reduced the analysis of labor to the analysis of the quantitative variable
of time, on the other hand there was someone called Marx who ... and so
on. Fine. The neo-liberals practically never argue with Marx for reasons
that we may think are to do with economic snobbery, it’s not important.14 March 1979
221
But if they took the trouble to argue with Marx I think it is quite easy
to see what they could say [about] his analysis. They would say: It is
quite true that Marx makes labor the linchpin, one of the essential
linchpins, of his analysis. But what does he do when he analyzes labor?
What is it that he shows the worker sells? Not his labor, but his labor
power. He sells his labor power for a certain time against a wage estab-
lished on the basis of a given situation of the market corresponding to
the balance between the supply and demand of labor power. And the
work performed by the worker is work that creates a value, part of which
is extorted from him. Marx clearly sees in this process the very mechan-
ics or logic of capitalism. And in what does this logic consist? Well, it
consists in the fact that the labor in all this is “abstract,”* that is to say,
the concrete labor transformed into labor power, measured by time, put
on the market and paid by wages, is not concrete labor; it is labor that
has been cut off from its human reality, from all its qualitative variables,
and precisely—this is indeed, in fact, what Marx shows—the logic of
capital reduces labor to labor power and time. It makes it a commodity
and reduces it to the effects of value produced.
Now, say the neo-liberals—and this is precisely where their criticism
departs from the criticism made by Marx—what is responsible for this
“abstraction.” † For Marx, capitalism itself is responsible; it is the fault of
the logic of capital and of its historical reality. Whereas the neo-liberals
say: The abstraction of labor, which actually only appears through the
variable of time, is not the product of real capitalism, [but] of the eco-
nomic theory that has been constructed of capitalist production.
Abstraction is not the result of the real mechanics of economic
processes; it derives from the way in which these processes have been
reflected in classical economics. And it is precisely because classical eco-
nomics was not able to take on this analysis of labor in its concrete spec-
ification and qualitative modulations, it is because it left this blank
page, gap or vacuum in its theory, that a whole philosophy, anthropol-
ogy, and politics, of which Marx is precisely the representative, rushed
* In inverted commas in the manuscript.
†
In inverted commas in the manuscript.222
t h e b i rt h o f b i o p o l i t i c s
in. Consequently, we should not continue with this, in a way, realist
criticism made by Marx, accusing real capitalism of having made real
labor abstract; we should undertake a theoretical criticism of the way in
which labor itself became abstract in economic discourse. And, the neo-
liberals say, if economists see labor in such an abstract way, if they fail to
grasp its specification, its qualitative modulations, and the economic
effects of these modulations, it is basically because classical economists
only ever envisaged the object of economics as processes of capital, of
investment, of the machine, of the product, and so on.
I think this is the general context in which we should situate the neo-
liberal analyses. However, the essential epistemological transformation
of these neo-liberal analyses is their claim to change what constituted in
fact the object, or domain of objects, the general field of reference of eco-
nomic analysis. In practice, economic analysis, from Adam Smith to the
beginning of the twentieth century, broadly speaking takes as its object
the study of the mechanisms of production, the mechanisms of
exchange, and the data of consumption within a given social structure,
along with the interconnections between these three mechanisms. Now,
for the neo-liberals, economic analysis should not consist in the study of
these mechanisms, but in the nature and consequences of what they call
substitutable choices, that is to say, the study and analysis of the way in
which scarce means are allocated to competing ends, that is to say, to
alternative ends which cannot be superimposed on each other. 23 In other
words, we have scarce means, and we do not have a single end or cumu-
lative ends for which it is possible to use these means, but ends between
which we must choose, and the starting point and general frame of ref-
erence for economic analysis should be the way in which individuals
allocate these scarce means to alternative ends.
In this they return to, or rather put to work, a definition of the object
of economics which was put forward around 1930 or 1932, I no longer
remember, by Robbins, 24 who, in this respect at least, may also be taken
as one of the founders of the doctrine of economic liberalism:
“Economics is the science of human behavior as a relationship between
ends and scarce means which have mutually exclusive uses.” 25 You can
see that this definition of economics does not identify its task as the
analysis of a relational mechanism between things or processes, like14 March 1979
223
capital, investment, and production, into which, given this, labor is in
some way inserted only as a cog; it adopts the task of analyzing a form of
human behavior and the internal rationality of this human behavior.
Analysis must try to bring to light the calculation—which, moreover,
may be unreasonable, blind, or inadequate—through which one or more
individuals decided to allot given scarce resources to this end rather than
another. Economics is not therefore the analysis of processes; it is the
analysis of an activity. So it is no longer the analysis of the historical
logic of processes; it is the analysis of the internal rationality, the stra-
tegic programming of individuals’ activity.
This means undertaking the economic analysis of labor. What does
bringing labor back into economic analysis mean? It does not mean
knowing where labor is situated between, let’s say, capital and produc-
tion. The problem of bringing labor back into the field of economic
analysis is not one of asking about the price of labor, or what it produces
technically, or what is the value added by labor. The fundamental,
essential problem, anyway the first problem which arises when one
wants to analyze labor in economic terms, is how the person who works
uses the means available to him. That is to say, to bring labor into the
field of economic analysis, we must put ourselves in the position of the
person who works; we will have to study work as economic conduct
practiced, implemented, rationalized, and calculated by the person who
works. What does working mean for the person who works? What sys-
tem of choice and rationality does the activity of work conform to? As a
result, on the basis of this grid which projects a principle of strategic
rationality on the activity of work, we will be able to see in what
respects and how the qualitative differences of work may have an eco-
nomic type of effect. So we adopt the point of view of the worker and,
for the first time, ensure that the worker is not present in the economic
analysis as an object—the object of supply and demand in the form of
labor power—but as an active economic subject.
Fine, how do we set about this task? People like Schultz and Becker
say: Why, in the end, do people work? They work, of course, to earn a
wage. What is a wage? A wage is quite simply an income. From the
point of view of the worker, the wage is an income, not the price at
which he sells his labor power. Here, the American neo-liberals refer to224
t h e b i rt h o f b i o p o l i t i c s
the old definition, which goes right back to the start of the twentieth
century, of Irving Fisher, 26 who said: What is an income? How can we
define an income? An income is quite simply the product or return on
a capital. Conversely, we will call “capital” everything that in one way or
another can be a source of future income. 27 Consequently, if we accept on
this basis that the wage is an income, then the wage is therefore the
income of a capital. Now what is the capital of which the wage is the
income? Well, it is the set of all those physical and psychological factors
which make someone able to earn this or that wage, so that, seen from
the side of the worker, labor is not a commodity reduced by abstraction
to labor power and the time [during] which it is used. Broken down in
economic terms, from the worker’s point of view labor comprises a cap-
ital, that is to say, it as an ability, a skill; as they say: it is a “machine.” 28
And on the other side it is an income, a wage, or rather, a set of wages;
as they say: an earnings stream. 29
This breakdown of labor into capital and income obviously has some
fairly important consequences. First, if capital is thus defined as that
which makes a future income possible, this income being a wage, then
you can see that it is a capital which in practical terms is inseparable
from the person who possesses it. To that extent it is not like other cap-
itals. Ability to work, skill, the ability to do something cannot be sepa-
rated from the person who is skilled and who can do this particular
thing. In other words, the worker’s skill really is a machine, but a
machine which cannot be separated from the worker himself, which
does not exactly mean, as economic, sociological, or psychological criti-
cism said traditionally, that capitalism transforms the worker into a
machine and alienates him as a result. We should think of the skill that
is united with the worker as, in a way, the side through which the
worker is a machine, but a machine understood in the positive sense,
since it is a machine that produces* an earnings stream. An earnings
stream and not an income, precisely because the machine constituted by
the worker’s ability is not, as it were, sold from time to time on the labor
market against a certain wage. In reality this machine has a lifespan, a
* Foucault adds: and which will produce something that are14 March 1979
225
length of time in which it can be used, an obsolescence, and an ageing.
So that we should think of the machine constituted by the worker’s
ability, the machine constituted by, if you like, ability and worker indi-
vidually bound together, as being remunerated over a period of time by
a series of wages which, to take the simplest case, will begin by being
relatively low when the machine begins to be used, then will rise, and
then will fall with the machine’s obsolescence or the ageing of the
worker insofar as he is a machine. We should therefore view the whole as
a machine/stream complex, say the neo-economists—all this is in
Schultz 30 is it not—it is therefore a machine-stream ensemble, and you
can see that we are at the opposite extreme of a conception of labor power
sold at the market price to a capital invested in an enterprise. This is not
a conception of labor power; it is a conception of capital-ability which,
according to diverse variables, receives a certain income that is a wage, an
income-wage, so that the worker himself appears as a sort of enterprise
for himself. Here, as you can see, the element I pointed out earlier in
German neo-liberalism, and to an extent in French neo-liberalism, is
pushed to the limit, that is to say, the idea that the basic element to be
deciphered by economic analysis is not so much the individual, or
processes and mechanisms, but enterprises. An economy made up of
enterprise-units, a society made up of enterprise-units, is at once the
principle of decipherment linked to liberalism and its programming for
the rationalization of a society and an economy.
I would say that in a sense, and this is what is usually said, neo-
liberalism appears under these conditions as a return to homo œconomicus.
This is true, but as you can see, with a considerable shift, since what is
homo œconomicus, economic man, in the classical conception? Well, he is
the man of exchange, the partner, one of the two partners in the process
of exchange. And this homo œconomicus, partner of exchange, entails, of
course, an analysis in terms of utility of what he is himself, a breakdown
of his behavior and ways of doing things, which refer, of course, to a
problematic of needs, since on the basis of these needs it will be possi-
ble to describe or define, or anyway found, a utility which leads to the
process of exchange. The characteristic feature of the classical conception
of homo œconomicus is the partner of exchange and the theory of utility
based on a problematic of needs.226
t h e b i rt h o f b i o p o l i t i c s
In neo-liberalism—and it does not hide this; it proclaims it—there is
also a theory of homo œconomicus, but he is not at all a partner of
exchange. Homo œconomicus is an entrepreneur, an entrepreneur of him-
self. This is true to the extent that, in practice, the stake in all neo-
liberal analyses is the replacement every time of homo œconomicus as
partner of exchange with a homo œconomicus as entrepreneur of himself,
being for himself his own capital, being for himself his own producer,
being for himself the source of [his] earnings. And I will not talk about
it here, because it would take too long, but in Gary Becker there is a very
interesting theory of consumption, 31 in which he says: We should not
think at all that consumption simply consists in being someone in a
process of exchange who buys and makes a monetary exchange in order
to obtain some products. The man of consumption is not one of the
terms of exchange. The man of consumption, insofar as he consumes, is
a producer. What does he produce? Well, quite simply, he produces his
own satisfaction. 32 And we should think of consumption as an enter-
prise activity by which the individual, precisely on the basis of the cap-
ital he has at his disposal, will produce something that will be his own
satisfaction. Consequently, the theory, the classical analysis trotted out a
hundred times of the person who is a consumer on the one hand, but
who is also a producer, and who, because of this, is, as it were, divided
in relation to himself, as well as all the sociological analyses—for they
have never been economic analyses—of mass consumption, of consumer
society, and so forth, do not hold up and have no value in relation to an
analysis of consumption in the neo-liberal terms of the activity of pro-
duction. So, even if there really is a return to the idea of homo œconomicus
as the analytical grid of economic activity, there is a complete change in
the conception of this homo œconomicus.
So, we arrive at this idea that the wage is nothing other than the
remuneration, the income allocated to a certain capital, a capital that we
will call human capital inasmuch as the ability-machine of which it is
the income cannot be separated from the human individual who is its
bearer. 33 How is this capital made up? It is at this point that the rein-
troduction of labor or work into the field of economic analysis will make
it possible, through a sort of acceleration or extension, to move on to the
economic analysis of elements which had previously totally escaped it.14 March 1979
227
In other words, the neo-liberals say that labor was in principle part of
economic analysis, but the way in which classical economic analysis was
conducted was incapable of dealing with this element. Good, we do deal
with it. And when they make this analysis, and do so in the terms I have
just described, they are led to study the way in which human capital is
formed and accumulated, and this enables them to apply economic
analyses to completely new fields and domains.
How is human capital made up? Well, they say, it is made up of innate
elements and other, acquired elements. 34 Let’s talk about the innate ele-
ments. There are those we can call hereditary, and others which are just
innate; differences which are, of course, self-evident for anyone with the
vaguest acquaintance with biology. I do not think that there are as yet
any studies on the problem of the hereditary elements of human capital,
but it is quite clear what form they could take and, above all, we can see
through anxieties, concerns, problems, and so on, the birth of something
which, according to your point of view, could be interesting or disturb-
ing. In actual fact, in the—I was going to say, classical—analyses of these
neo-liberals, in the analyses of Schultz or Becker, for example, it is
indeed said that the formation of human capital only has interest and
only becomes relevant for the economists inasmuch as this capital is
formed thanks to the use of scarce means, to the alternative use of scarce
means for a given end. Now obviously we do not have to pay to have the
body we have, or we do not have to pay for our genetic make-up. It costs
nothing. Yes, it costs nothing—and yet, we need to see ... , and we can
easily imagine something like this occurring (I am just engaging in a bit
of science fiction here, it is a kind of problematic which is currently
becoming pervasive).
In fact, modern genetics clearly shows that many more elements than
was previously thought are conditioned by the genetic make-up we
receive from our ancestors. In particular, genetics makes it possible to
establish for any given individual the probabilities of their contracting
this or that type of disease at a given age, during a given period of life,
or in any way at any moment of life. In other words, one of the current
interests in the application of genetics to human populations is to make
it possible to recognize individuals at risk and the type of risk individ-
uals incur throughout their life. You will say: Here again, there’s228
t h e b i rt h o f b i o p o l i t i c s
nothing we can do; our parents made us like this. Yes, of course, but
when we can identify what individuals are at risk, and what the risks are
of a union of individuals at risk producing an individual with a partic-
ular characteristic that makes him or her the carrier of a risk, then we
can perfectly well imagine the following: good genetic make-ups—that
is to say, [those] able to produce individuals with low risk or with a
level of risk which will not be harmful for themselves, those around
them, or society—will certainly become scarce, and insofar as they are
scarce they may perfectly well [enter], and this is entirely normal, into
economic circuits or calculations, that is to say, alternative choices.
Putting it in clear terms, this will mean that given my own genetic
make-up, if I wish to have a child whose genetic make-up will be at least
as good as mine, or as far as possible better than mine, then I will have
to find someone who also has a good genetic make-up. And if you want
a child whose human capital, understood simply in terms of innate and
hereditary elements, is high, you can see that you will have to make an
investment, that is to say, you will have to have worked enough, to have
sufficient income, and to have a social status such that it will enable you
to take for a spouse or co-producer of this future human capital, some-
one who has significant human capital themselves. I am not saying this
as a joke; it is simply a form of thought or a form of problematic that is
currently being elaborated. 35
What I mean is that if the problem of genetics currently provokes
such anxiety, I do not think it is either useful or interesting to translate
this anxiety into the traditional terms of racism. If we want to try to
grasp the political pertinence of the present development of genetics,
we must do so by trying to grasp its implications at the level of actual-
ity itself, with the real problems that it raises. And as soon as a society
poses itself the problem of the improvement of its human capital in
general, it is inevitable that the problem of the control, screening, and
improvement of the human capital of individuals, as a function of
unions and consequent reproduction, will become actual, or at any rate,
called for. So, the political problem of the use of genetics arises in terms
of the formation, growth, accumulation, and improvement of human
capital. What we might call the racist effects of genetics is certainly14 March 1979
229
something to be feared, and they are far from being eradicated, but this
does not seem to me to be the major political issue at the moment.
Fine, let’s leave this problem of investment in and the costly choice of
the formation of a genetic human capital. Obviously, the neo-liberals
pose their problems and set out their new type of analysis much more
from the angle of acquired human capital, that is to say, of the more or
less voluntary formation of human capital in the course of individuals’
lives. What does it mean to form human capital, and so to form these
kinds of abilities-machines which will produce income, which will be
remunerated by income? It means, of course, making what are called
educational investments. 36 In truth, we have not had to wait for the
neo-liberals to measure some of the effects of these educational invest-
ments, whether this involves school instruction strictly speaking, or
professional training, and so on. But the neo-liberals lay stress on the
fact that what should be called educational investment is much broader
than simple schooling or professional training and that many more
elements than these enter into the formation of human capital. 37
What constitutes this investment that forms an abilities-machine?
Experimentally, on the basis of observations, we know it is constituted
by, for example, the time parents devote to their children outside of
simple educational activities strictly speaking. We know that the num-
ber of hours a mother spends with her child, even when it is still in the
cradle, will be very important for the formation of an abilities-
machine, or for the formation of a human capital, and that the child
will be much more adaptive if in fact its parents or its mother spend
more rather than less time with him or her. This means that it must be
possible to analyze the simple time parents spend feeding their chil-
dren, or giving them affection as investment which can form human
capital. Time spent, care given, as well as the parents’ education—
because we know quite precisely that for an equal time spent with their
children, more educated parents will form a higher human capital than
parents with less education—in short, the set of cultural stimuli
received by the child, will all contribute to the formation of those ele-
ments that can make up a human capital. This means that we thus
arrive at a whole environmental analysis, as the Americans say, of the230
t h e b i rt h o f b i o p o l i t i c s
child’s life which it will be possible to calculate, and to a certain extent
quantify, or at any rate measure, in terms of the possibilities of invest-
ment in human capital. What in the child’s family life will produce
human capital? What type of stimuli, form of life, and relationship
with parents, adults, and others can be crystallized into human capi-
tal? Fine, I am going quickly since we must get on. In the same way, we
can analyze medical care and, generally speaking, all activities concern-
ing the health of individuals, which will thus appear as so many ele-
ments which enable us, first, to improve human capital, and second, to
preserve and employ it for as long as possible. Thus, all the problems of
health care and public hygiene must, or at any rate, can be rethought as
elements which may or may not improve human capital.
In the elements making up human capital we should also include
mobility, that is to say, an individual’s ability to move around, and
migration in particular. 38 Because migration obviously represents a
material cost, since the individual will not be earning while he is mov-
ing, but there will also be a psychological cost for the individual estab-
lishing himself in his new milieu. There will also be at least a loss of
earnings due to the fact that the period of adaptation will certainly pre-
vent the individual from receiving his previous remunerations, or those
he will have when he is settled. All these negative elements show that
migration has a cost. What is the function of this cost? It is to obtain an
improvement of status, of remuneration, and so on, that is to say, it is an
investment. Migration is an investment; the migrant is an investor. He
is an entrepreneur of himself who incurs expenses by investing to obtain
some kind of improvement. The mobility of a population and its ability
to make choices of mobility as investment choices for improving income
enable the phenomena of migration to be brought back into economic
analysis, not as pure and simple effects of economic mechanisms which
extend beyond individuals and which, as it were, bind them to an
immense machine which they do not control, but as behavior in terms
individual enterprise, of enterprise of oneself with investments and
incomes.
What, you will ask, is the interest of all these analyses? You will be
aware of the immediate political connotations and there is no need to
stress them further. If there were only this lateral political product, we14 March 1979
231
could no doubt brush this kind of analysis aside with a gesture, or at any
rate purely and simply denounce it. But I think this would be both mis-
taken and dangerous. In fact, this kind of analysis makes it possible first
of all to reappraise phenomena which have been identified for some
time, since the end of the nineteenth century, and to which no satisfac-
tory status has been given. This is the problem of technical progress, or
what Schumpeter called “innovation.” 39 Schumpeter—he was not the
first, but we are just refocusing things around him—noted that, contrary
to the predictions of Marx and classical economics more generally, the
tendency of the rate of profit to fall actually turned out to be continu-
ously corrected. You know that the theory of imperialism, as in Rosa
Luxembourg, 40 provided an interpretation of this correction of the
tendency of the rate of profit to fall. Schumpeter’s analysis consists in
saying that the absence of this fall, or this correction of the falling rate of
profit, is not due simply to the phenomenon of imperialism. It is due,
generally,* [to] innovation, that is to say, [to] the discovery of new tech-
niques, sources, and forms of productivity, and also the discovery of new
markets or new resources of manpower. 41 In any case, the explanation of
this phenomenon is to be sought in the new and in innovation, which
Schumpeter thinks is absolutely consubstantial with the functioning of
capitalism.
[The neo-liberals take up] † this problem of innovation, and so of
the tendency of the falling rate of profit, and they do not take it up
as a sort of ethical-psychological characteristic of capitalism, or as an
ethical-economic-psychological characteristic of capitalism, as Schumpeter
did in a problematic which was not so far from Max Weber’s, but they
say: We cannot halt at this problem of innovation and, as it were, trust
in the boldness of capitalism or the permanent stimulation of competi-
tion to explain this phenomenon of innovation. If there is innovation,
that is to say, if we find new things, discover new forms of productivity,
and make technological innovations, this is nothing other than the
income of a certain capital, of human capital, that is to say, of the set of
investments we have made at the level of man himself. Taking up the
* Foucault adds: and it puts [inaudible word] moreover as a category of this more general process.
†
M.F.: the analyses of the neo-liberals are situated232
t h e b i rt h o f b i o p o l i t i c s
problem of innovation within the more general theory of human capital,
and by re-examining Western and Japanese history since 1930, they try
to show that we absolutely cannot account for the considerable growth
of these countries over forty or fifty years simply [on the basis of] the
variables of classical analysis, that is to say, land, capital, and labor
understood as time of labor, that is to say, the number of workers and
hours. Only a fine analysis of the composition of the human capital, of
the way this human capital has been augmented, of the sectors in which
it has been augmented, and of the elements which have been introduced
as investment in this human capital, can account for the real growth of
these countries. 42
On the basis of this theoretical and historical analysis we can thus
pick out the principles of a policy of growth which will no longer be
simply indexed to the problem of the material investment of physical
capital, on the one hand, and of the number of workers, [on the other],
but a policy of growth focused precisely on one of the things that the
West can modify most easily, and that is the form of investment in
human capital. And in fact we are seeing the economic policies of all
the developed countries, but also their social policies, as well as their
cultural and educational policies, being orientated in these terms. In
the same way, the problems of the economy of the Third World can also
be rethought on the basis of human capital. And you know that cur-
rently an attempt is being made to rethink the problem of the failure of
Third World economies to get going, not in terms of the blockage of
economic mechanisms, but in terms of insufficient investment in
human capital. And here again a number of historical analyses are
taken up again, like the famous problem of the Western economic take-
off in the sixteenth and seventeenth century. To what was this due? Was
it due to the accumulation of physical capital? Historians are increas-
ingly skeptical about this hypothesis. Was it not due precisely to the
existence of an accumulation, an accelerated accumulation, of human
capital? So, we are invited to take up a schema of historical analysis, as
well as a programming of policies of economic development, which
could be orientated, and which are in actual fact orientated, towards
these new paths. Of course, this does not mean eliminating the14 March 1979
233
elements, the political connotations I referred to a moment ago, but
rather of showing how these political connotations owe their serious-
ness, their density, or, if you like, their coefficient of threat to the very
effectiveness of the analysis and programming of the processes I am
talking about.*
* Foucault stops the lecture here and, due to lack of time, does not develop the final points
of the last part of the lecture dealing with the relevance of this kind of analysis for (a) wages,
(b) a series of problems concerning education, and (c) the possibilities of analysis of familial
behavior. The manuscript ends with these lines:
“Problematizing in a different way all the domains of education, culture, and training that soci-
ology has taken up. Not that sociology has neglected the economic aspect of this, but, confining
oneself to Bourdieu,
—reproduction of relations of production
—culture as social solidification of economic differences
Whereas in the neo-liberal analysis, all these elements are directly integrated in the economy
and its growth in the form of a formation of productive capital.
All the problems of [inheritance?]—transmission—education—training—inequality of level,
treated from a single point of view as homogenizable elements, themselves in their [turn?] re-
focused no longer around an anthropology or an ethics or a politics of labor, but around an
economics of capital. And the individual considered as an enterprise, i.e., as an investment/
investor ( ... ).
His conditions of life are the income of a capital.”234
t h e b i rt h o f b i o p o l i t i c s
1. On the reception of American neo-liberal ideas in France at the end of the seventies, see
in addition to the work by H. Lepage already referred to (Demain le capitalisme), the col-
lective work edited by J.-J. Rosa and F. Aftalion, L’Économique retrouvée. Vieilles critiques et
nouvelles analyses (Paris: Economica, 1977). The appearance of the former gave rise to a
number of articles in the press, among which see those of J.-F. Revel, “Le Roi est habillé,”
L’Express, 27 February 1978; G. Suffert, “Économistes: la nouvelle vague,” Le Point,
13 March 1978; R. Priouret, “Vive la jungle!” Le Nouvel Observateur, 11 April 1978 (which
refers to the negative tax, among the social correctives remaining within the framework of
the market, and refers to L. Stoléru: on both, see above, lecture of 7 March 1979);
B. Cazes, “La désenchantement du monde se poursuit ... ,” La Quinzaine littéraire, 16 May
1978; P. Drouin, “Feux croisés sur l’État,” Le Monde, 13 May 1978, etcetera. Several of
these present the spread of these ideas in France as a response to the book by J. Attali and
M. Guillaume, L’Anti-économique (Paris: PUF, 1972), which echoed American New
Left theses (see H. Lepage, Demain le capitalisme, pp. 9–12). See also the interview: “Que
veulent les nouveaux économistes? L’Express va plus loin avec J.-J. Rosa,” L’Express,
5 June 1978.
2. In addition to the books and articles cited in the following notes, Foucault had read on
the subject the anthology of H.J. Silverman, ed., American Radical Thought: The libertarian
tradition (Lexington, Mass.: D.C. Heath and Co., 1970) and H.L. Miller, “On the
Chicago School of Economics,” Journal of Political Economy, vol. 70 (1), February 1962,
pp. 64–69.
3. Henry Calvert Simons (1889–1946), author of Economic Policy for a Free Society (Chicago:
University of Chicago Press, 1948).
4. It is actually a book: A Positive Program for Laissez-Faire: Some proposals for a liberal economic
policy? (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1934); republished in Economic Policy for a
Free Society.
5. See above, lecture of 7 February 1979, note 38.
6. H.C. Simons, “The Beveridge Progam: an unsympathetic interpretation,” Journal of Political
Economy, vol. 53 (3), September 1945, pp. 212–233; republished in Economic Policy for a Free
Society, ch. 13.
7. See above, lecture of 31 January 1979, note 7.
8. Ibid., note 9.
9. The coalition of Left parties that exercised power in France from June 1936 until April 1938.
Under the presidency of Léon Blum, this government passed several measures of social
reform (the 40 hour week, paid vacations, nationalization of the railways, and so on).
10. Foucault is alluding to the events that unleashed the War of Independence (1775–1783),
notably the “Boston Tea Party” (16 December 1773), in the course of which some colonists,
disguised as Indians, dumped in the sea a cargo of tea belonging to the East India Company
to whom the English Parliament had just opened the doors of the American market. The
English government responded with a series of laws—“intolerable acts”—which led to the
1st continental Congress at Philadelphia in September 1774.
11. This may be a fairly free reformulation of Hayek’s reflections in his post-script to The
Constitution of Liberty, “Why I am not a Conservative,” pp. 398–399.
12. See H. Lepage, Demain le capitalisme, pp. 21–28; 326–372 (on G. Becker). Some chapters
from this book appeared in 1977 in the columns of Realités. For the chapter on Becker, the
author refers in addition to the lectures of Jean-Jacques Rosa, “Théorie micro-
économique,” IEP, 1977. See also M. Riboud and F. Hernandez Iglesias, “La théorie du cap-
ital humain: un retour aux classiques,” in J.-J. Rosa and F. Aftalion, eds., L’Économique
retrouvée, pp. 226–249; M. Riboud, Accumulation du capital humain (Paris: Economica, 1978).
These two works were in Foucault’s library.
13. See Adam Smith, An Inquiry into the Nature and Causes of the Wealth of Nations (Oxford:
Oxford University Press, 1976), Book I, ch. 1–3. On Smith’s analysis of labor, see Les Mots
et les Choses, pp. 233–238; The Order of Things, pp. 221–226.
14. David Ricardo (1772–1823), The Principles of Political Economy and Taxation (London: Dent,
Everyman’s Library, 1973) ch. 1, section 2. See M. Riboud and F. Hernandez Iglesias, “La
théorie du capital humain” p. 227: “[In the analysis of the classical economists], the14 March 1979
15.
16.
17.
18.
19.
20.
21.
22.
23.
24.
25.
235
increase of the labor factor necessarily expressed an additional number of workers or of
hours of work per man, that is to say a quantitative increase.” See also the comments of
J. Mincer, in his foreword to the thesis of M. Riboud, Accumulation du capital humain, p. iii:
“The simplifying hypothesis of the homogeneity of the labor factor, made by Ricardo, cre-
ated a void whose consequence was to leave the study of the structure of wages and employ-
ment to supporters of the ‘institutionalist’ approach (the study of the types of relations
existing between workers and the management of enterprises), to the analysts of economic
fluctuations, and to statisticians (descriptive statistics).”
On the time-labor relation in Ricardo, see Les Mots et les Choses, pp. 265–270; The Order of
Things, pp. 253–259.
See M. Riboud and F. Hernandez Iglesias, “La théorie du capital humain” p. 231: “As for
the analysis of Keynes, it is even further from the idea of investment in human capital than
the Classics. For him, the labor factor is basically a passive factor of production if a suffi-
ciently high rate of investment in physical capital exists” (this latter phrase is underlined
in Foucault’s copy of the book; see above, this lecture, note 12).
Theodore W. Schultz (1902–1998): professor of economics at the University of Chicago
from 1946 to 1974. Nobel Prize for economics in 1979. His article, “The emerging economic
scene and its relation to High School Education,” in F.S. Chase and H.A. Anderson, eds.,
The High School in a New Era (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1958) opened up the
field of research on human capital. See M. Beaud and G. Dostaler, La Pensée économique
depuis Keynes (Paris: Le Seuil, 1996), pp. 387–390. See Theodore W. Schultz, translation by
J. Challali, Il n’est de richesse que d’hommes. Investissement humain et qualité de la population
(Paris: Bonnel, 1983).
T.W. Schultz, “Capital formation by education,” Journal of Political Economy, vol. 68, 1960,
pp. 571–583; “Investment in human capital,” American Economic Review, vol. 51, March 1961,
pp. 1–17 (reprinted in the book with the same title cited below in this note); “Reflections
on investment in man,” Journal of Political Economy, vol 70 (5), 2nd part, October 1962,
pp. 1–8; Investment in Human Capital: The role of education and research (New York: The Free
Press, 1971).
Gary Becker (born 1930): doctor of economics (University of Chicago, 1925); teaches at
Columbia until 1968 and then returns to Chicago. Vice President of the Mont-Pèlerin
Society in 1989. Nobel Prize in 1992. See H. Lepage, Demain le capitalisme, p. 323.
G. Becker, “Investment in human capital: a theoretical analysis,” Journal of Political Economy,
vol. 70 (5), 2nd part, October 1962, pp. 9–49; article republished, considerably expanded
in Human Capital: A theoretical and empirical analysis with special reference to education
(New York: National Bureau of Economic Research, 1964; 3rd edition, Chicago and London:
The University of Chicago Press, 1993) pp. 29–158 (“Investment in human capital: effect on
earnings,” pp. 29–58, and “Investment in human capital: rates of return,” pp. 59–158).
Jacob Mincer, born in Poland (1922); professor at the University of Columbia.
J. Mincer, Schooling, Experience and Earnings (New York: National Bureau of Economic
Research, 1974); see also “Investment in human capital and personal income distribution,”
Journal of Political Economy, vol. 66, August 1958, pp. 281–302, that Theodore Schultz
describes as a “pioneering paper” in his Investment in Human Capital, p. 46, note 33. The
expression “human capital” appears for the first time in this article (see M. Beaud and
G. Dostaler, La Pensée économique, p. 184).
See G. Becker, The Economic Approach to Human Behavior (Chicago and London: University
of Chicago Press, 1976), p. 4: he rejects “the definition of economics in terms of material
goods” in favor of a definition “in terms of scarce means and competing ends.”
Lionel C. Robbins (Lord, 1898–1984): English economist, professor at the London School
of Economics, and author notably of a work on the methodology of economic science, Essay
on the Nature and Significance of Economic Science (1st edition 1932, republished, London:
Macmillan, 1962). Hostile to the positions of Keynes at the time of the crisis of the
thirties, he changed his position after his experience as advisor to the British government
during the war.
Ibid., p. 16: “Economics is the science which studies human behavior as a relationship
between ends and scarce means which have mutually exclusive uses” (quoted by G. Becker,
The Economic Approach, p. 1, note 3).236
t h e b i rt h o f b i o p o l i t i c s
26. Irving Fisher (1867–1947), a mathematician by training, professor at Yale University from
1898 until the end of his career. In particular, he is the author of The Nature of Capital and
Income (New York and London: Macmillan, 1906). See Joseph A. Schumpeter, History of
Economic Analysis, pp. 872–873.
27. The formulae are drawn from the article already cited by M. Riboud and F. Hernandez
Iglesias, “La théorie du capital humain” p. 228: “Capital should be understood here in
accordance with the conception of the market developed by Irving Fisher: we will call cap-
ital every source of future income and, reciprocally, income (all categories of income) is the
product or return of the capital (of different forms of capital).” See, Joseph A. Schumpeter,
History of Economic Analysis, pp. 898–899, and K. Pribram, A History of Economic Reasoning,
p. 329: “According to Fisher, capital was the whole of things owned by individuals or soci-
eties at some particular moment in time, constituting claims or purchasing power and
being capable of yielding interest.”
28. The word “machine” seems to be Foucault’s, an allusion or wink to L’Anti-Œdipe of Gilles
Deleuze and Felix Guattari (Paris: Minuit, 1972); English translation by Robert Hurley,
Mark Seem, and Helen R. Lane, Anti-Oedipus. Capitalism and Schizophrenia (New York: The
Viking Press, 1977). On the machine/flows couple, see for example, pp. 43–44; pp. 38–39
of this book. Neither Becker nor Schultz use the term with regard to ability. The latter,
however, proposes to integrate “the innate abilities of man” in “an all-inclusive concept of
technology” in Investment in Human Capital, p. 11.
29. “Earnings stream” or “income stream.” See for example, T.W. Schultz, Investment in Human
Capital, p. 75: “Not all investment in human capital is for future earnings alone. Some of it
is for future well-being in forms that are not captured in the earnings stream of the
individual in whom the investments are made.”
30. Ibid.
31. See G. Becker, “On the new Theory of Consumer Behavior,” Swedish Journal of Economics,
vol. 75, 1973, pp. 375–395, reprinted in The Economic Approach, pp. 130–149. See H. Lepage,
Demain le capitalisme, ch. VIII: “La nouvelle théorie du consommateur (Les révolutions de
G. Becker).”
32. G. Becker, The Economic Approach, p. 134: “( ... ) this approach views as the primary objects
of consumer choice various entities, called commodities, from which utility is directly
obtained. These commodities are produced by the consumer unit itself through the pro-
ductive activity of combining purchased market goods and services with some of the house-
hold’s own time.” In his article, “A Theory of the Allocation of Time” Economic Journal, 75,
no. 299, September 1965, pp. 493–517 (republished in The Economic Approach, pp. 90–114)
Becker sets out for the first time this analysis of the production functions of consumption
activities (see M. Riboud and F. Hernandez Iglesias, “La théorie du capital humain”
pp. 241–242). See H. Lepage, Demain le capitalisme, p. 327: “In this perspective, the consumer
is not only a being who consumes; he is an economic agent who ‘produces.’ Who produces
what? Who produces satisfactions of which he is the consumer.”
33. See T.W. Schultz, Investment in Human Capital, p. 148: “The distinctive mark of human cap-
ital is that it is a part of man. It is human because it is embodied in man, and capital because
it is a source of future satisfactions, or of future earnings, or of both” (a phrase which is
taken up again on p. 161 with regard to education as a form of human capital).
34. See M. Riboud and F. Hernandez Iglesias, “La théorie du capital humain” p. 235: “If, as the
theory of human capital lays down as its hypothesis, an individual’s productivity depends
in part on the capabilities he has inherited at birth and in part (more importantly) on the
capabilities he has acquired through investments, then his level of income at each period of
his life will vary directly with the rising stock of human capital he has at his disposal at
that moment.”
35. On these questions, see the 6th part of Becker’s The Economic Approach, pp. 169–250:
“Marriage, fertility and the family”; T.W. Schultz, “New economic approach to fertility,”
Journal of Political Economy, vol. 81 (2) part II, March-April 1973; A. Leibowitz, “Home
investments in children,” Journal of Political Economy, vol. 82 (2), part II, March-April 1974.
See M. Riboud and F. Hernandez Iglesias, “La théorie du capital humain” pp. 240–241 (on
the choice between “quantity” and “quality” of children according to the human capital14 March 1979
36.
37.
38.
39.
40.
41.
42.
237
that parents wish to pass on to them); H. Lepage, Demain le capitalisme, p. 344 (“La théorie
économique de la démographie”).
See H. Lepage, Demain le capitalisme, pp. 337–343: “L’investissement en ‘capital humain’ et
les écarts de salaire.”
See the list of forms of investment established by T.W. Schultz, Investment in Human Capital,
p. 8: “( ... ) during the past decade, there have been important advances in economic think-
ing with respect to human capital. This set of investments is classified as follows: schooling
and higher education, on-the-job training, migration, health, and economic information.”
On this subject, see the list of works cited by T.W. Schultz, ibid., p. 191.
See above, lecture of 14 February 1979, p. 163, note 59.
See Rosa Luxembourg (1971–1919), Die Akkumulation des Kapitals. Ein Beitrag zur ökonomis-
chen Erklärung des Imperialismus (Berlin: B. Singer, 1913); French translation by M. Ollivier,
L’Accumulation du capital. Contribution à l’explication économique de l’impérialisme (Paris:
Librairie du travail, 1935), new translation by I. Petit (Paris: F. Maspero, 1967) 2 vols.;
English translation by Agnes Schwarzschild, The Accumulation of Capital (London:
Routledge, 2003).
The motor of development (as opposed to the “circuit”), innovation, according to
Schumpeter, is not assimilated to simple technical progress. Five categories of innovation
can be distinguished: (1) the manufacture of a new good; (2) the introduction of a new
method of production; (3) the opening of a new outlet; (4) the conquest of a new source
of raw materials; and (5) the implementation of a new method of organization of produc-
tion. See J. Schumpeter, The Theory of Economic Development, ch. 2, section 2. It is the
concentration of capital, we recall, that tends to bureaucratize innovation, thus depriving
the enterprise of its essential justification and thereby putting the very survival of capital-
ism in question (see above, lecture of 21 February 1979, pp. 177–178).
On the limits of the traditional tripartite classification—land, labor, and capital—in the
analysis of economic growth and its inability to account for the “mystery of modern
abundance,” see T.W. Schultz, Investment in Human Capital, pp. 2–4.This page intentionally left blankten
21 March 1979
[ ]
American neo-liberalism (II). ⵑ The application of the
economic grid to social phenomena. ⵑ Return to the ordoliberal
problematic: the ambiguities of the Gesellschaftspolitik. The
generalization of the “enterprise” form in the social field. Economic
policy and Vitalpolitik: a society for the market and against the
market. ⵑ The unlimited generalization of the economic form of the
market in American neo-liberalism: principle of the intelligibility of
individual behavior and critical principle of governmental
interventions. ⵑ Aspects of American neo-liberalism: (2)
Delinquency and penal policy. ⵑ Historical reminder: the problem
of the reform of penal law at the end of the eighteenth century.
Economic calculation and principle of legality. The parasitic
invasion of the law by the norm in the nineteenth century and the
birth of criminal anthropology. ⵑ The neo-liberal analysis: (1) the
definition of crime; (2) the description of the criminal subject as
homo œconomicus; (3) the status of the penalty as instrument of
law “enforcement.” The example of the drugs market. ⵑ
Consequences of this analysis: (a) anthropological erasure of the
criminal; (b) putting the disciplinary model out of play.
TODAY I WOULD LIKE to talk a little about one aspect of American
neo-liberalism, that is to say, the way in which [the American neo-liberals]*
* M.F.: they240
t h e b i rt h o f b i o p o l i t i c s
try to use the market economy and the typical analyses of the market
economy to decipher non-market relationships and phenomena which
are not strictly and specifically economic but what we call social
phenomena.* In other words, this means that I want to talk about the
application of the economic grid to a field which since the nineteenth
century, and we can no doubt say already at the end of the eighteenth
century, was defined in opposition to the economy, or at any rate, as
complementary to the economy, as that which in itself, in its own struc-
ture and processes, does not fall within the economy, even though the
economy itself is situated within this domain. In other words again,
what I think is at stake in this kind of analysis is the problem of the
inversion of the relationships of the social to the economic.
Let’s go back to the theme of German liberalism, or ordoliberalism.
You recall that in this conception—of Eucken, Röpke, Müller-Armack,
and others—the market was defined as a principle of economic regula-
tion indispensable to the formation of prices and so to the consistent
development of the economic process. What was the government’s task
in relation to this principle of the market as the indispensable regulat-
ing function of the economy? It was to organize a society, to establish
what they call a Gesellschaftspolitik such that these fragile competitive
mechanisms of the market can function to the full and in accordance
with their specific structure. 1 Such a Gesellschaftspolitik was therefore ori-
entated towards the formation of a market. It was a policy that had to
take charge of social processes and take them into account in order to
make room for a market mechanism within them. But what did this
policy of society, this Gesellschaftspolitik have to consist in for it to suc-
ceed in constituting a market space in which competitive mechanisms
could really function despite their intrinsic fragility? It consisted in a
number of objectives which I have talked about, such as, for example,
avoiding centralization, encouraging medium sized enterprises, support
for what they call non-proletarian enterprises, that is to say, broadly,
craft enterprises, small businesses, etcetera, increasing access to property
ownership, trying to replace the social insurance of risk with individual
* In the manuscript, this lecture has the title: “The market economy and non-market
relationships.”21 March 1979
241
insurance, and also regulating all the multiple problems of the
environment.
Obviously, this Gesellschaftspolitik includes a number of ambiguities
and raises a number of questions. There is the question, for example, of
its purely optative and “light” * character in comparison with the heavy
and far more real processes of the economy. There is also the fact that it
entails a weight, a field, an extraordinarily large number of interven-
tions which raise the question of whether they do in fact correspond to
the principle that they must not act directly on the economic process
but only intervene in favor of the economic process. In short, there are
a number of questions and ambiguities, but I would like to emphasize
the following: in this idea of a Gesellschaftspolitik there is what I would
call an economic-ethical ambiguity around the notion of enterprise
itself, because what does it mean to conduct a Gesellschaftspolitik in the
sense this is given by Röpke, Rüstow, and Müller-Armack? On one
side it means generalizing the “enterprise” form within the social body
or social fabric; it means taking this social fabric and arranging things
so that it can be broken down, subdivided, and reduced, not according
to the grain of individuals, but according to the grain of enterprises.
The individual’s life must be lodged, not within a framework of a big
enterprise like the firm or, if it comes to it, the state, but within the
framework of a multiplicity of diverse enterprises connected up to and
entangled with each other, enterprises which are in some way ready to
hand for the individual, sufficiently limited in their scale for the indi-
vidual’s actions, decisions, and choices to have meaningful and percep-
tible effects, and numerous enough for him not to be dependent on one
alone. And finally, the individual’s life itself—with his relationships to
his private property, for example, with his family, household, insur-
ance, and retirement—must make him into a sort of permanent and
multiple enterprise. So this way of giving a new form to society accord-
ing to the model of the enterprise, or of enterprises, and down to the
fine grain of its texture, is an aspect of the German ordoliberals’
Gesellschaftspolitik. 2
* In inverted commas in the manuscript.242
t h e b i rt h o f b i o p o l i t i c s
What is the function of this generalization of the “enterprise”* form?
On the one hand, of course, it involves extending the economic model of
supply and demand and of investment-costs-profit so as to make it a
model of social relations and of existence itself, a form of relationship of
the individual to himself, time, those around him, the group, and the
family. So, it involves extending this economic model. On the other
hand, the ordoliberal idea of making the enterprise the universally gen-
eralized social model functions in their analysis or program as a support
to what they designate as the reconstruction of a set of what could be
called “warm” † moral and cultural values which are presented precisely
as antithetical to the “cold” ‡ mechanism of competition. The enterprise
schema involves acting so that the individual, to use the classical and
fashionable terminology of their time, is not alienated from his work
environment, from the time of his life, from his household, his family,
and from the natural environment. It is a matter of reconstructing con-
crete points of anchorage around the individual which form what
Rüstow called the Vitalpolitik. 3 The return to the enterprise is therefore
at once an economic policy or a policy of the economization of the entire
social field, of an extension of the economy to the entire social field, but
at the same time a policy which presents itself or seeks to be a kind of
Vitalpolitik with the function of compensating for what is cold, impas-
sive, calculating, rational, and mechanical in the strictly economic game
of competition.
The enterprise society imagined by the ordoliberals is therefore a
society for the market and a society against the market, a society ori-
ented towards the market and a society that compensates for the effects
of the market in the realm of values and existence. This is what Rüstow
said in the Walter Lippmann colloquium I have talked about: 4 “We have
to organize the economy of the social body according to the rules of the
market economy, but the fact remains that we still have to satisfy new
and heightened needs for integration.” 5 This is the Vitalpolitik. A bit
later, Röpke said: “Competition is a principle of order in the domain of
* In inverted commas in the manuscript.
†
In inverted commas in the manuscript.
‡
In inverted commas in the manuscript.21 March 1979
243
the market economy, but it is not a principle on which it would be pos-
sible to erect the whole of society. Morally and sociologically, competi-
tion is a principle that dissolves more than it unifies.” So, while
establishing a policy such that competition can function economically, it
is necessary to organize “a political and moral framework,” Röpke says. 6
What will this political and moral framework comprise? First, it
requires a state that can maintain itself above the different competing
groups and enterprises. This political and moral framework must ensure
“a community which is not fragmented,” and guarantee cooperation
between men who are “naturally rooted and socially integrated.” 7
In comparison with the ambiguity, if you like, of German ordoliberal-
ism, American neo-liberalism evidently appears much more radical or
much more complete and exhaustive. American neo-liberalism still
involves, in fact, the generalization of the economic form of the market. It
involves generalizing it throughout the social body and including the whole
of the social system not usually conducted through or sanctioned by mon-
etary exchanges. This, as it were, absolute generalization, this unlimited
generalization of the form of the market entails a number of consequences
or includes a number of aspects and I would like to focus on two of these.
First, the generalization of the economic form of the market beyond
monetary exchanges functions in American neo-liberalism as a principle
of intelligibility and a principle of decipherment of social relationships
and individual behavior. This means that analysis in terms of the market
economy or, in other words, of supply and demand, can function as a
schema which is applicable to non-economic domains. And, thanks to
this analytical schema or grid of intelligibility, it will be possible to reveal
in non-economic processes, relations, and behavior a number of intelligi-
ble relations which otherwise would not have appeared as such—a sort of
economic analysis of the non-economic. The neo-liberals do this for a
number of domains. I referred to some of these problems last week, with
regard to investment in human capital. In their analysis of human capi-
tal, you recall, the neo-liberals tried to explain, for example, how the
mother-child relationship, concretely characterized by the time spent by
the mother with the child, the quality of the care she gives, the affection
she shows, the vigilance with which she follows its development, its edu-
cation, and not only its scholastic but also its physical progress, the way244
t h e b i rt h o f b i o p o l i t i c s
in which she not only gives it food but also imparts a particular style to
eating patterns, and the relationship she has with its eating, all constitute
for the neo-liberals an investment which can be measured in time. And
what will this investment constitute? It will constitute a human capital,
the child’s human capital, which will produce an income. 8 What will this
income be? It will be the child’s salary when he or she becomes an adult.
And what will the income be for the mother who made the investment?
Well, the neo-liberals say, it will be a psychical income. She will have the
satisfaction a mother gets from giving the child care and attention in see-
ing that she has in fact been successful. So, everything comprising what
could be called, if you like, the formative or educational relationship, in
the widest sense of the term, between mother and child, can be analyzed
in terms of investment, capital costs, and profit—both economic and
psychological profit—on the capital invested.
In the same way, the neo-liberals turn to the study of the problem of
the birth rate and try to analyze again the fact that wealthy, or wealth-
ier families are clearly more Malthusian than poorer families, in the
sense that the higher the income the smaller the family is an old law
that everyone knows. But even so, they say, this is paradoxical, since in
strictly Malthusian terms more income should enable one to have more
children. To which they [answer]: But is the Malthusian conduct of
these wealthy people really an economic paradox? Is it due to non-
economic factors of a moral, ethical, or cultural kind? Not at all, they
say. Economic factors are still and always at work here inasmuch as
people with high incomes are people who possess a high human capital,
as is proven by their high incomes. Their problem is not so much to
transmit to their children an inheritance in the classical sense of the
term, as the transmission of this other element, human capital, which also
links the generations to each other but in a completely different way. Their
problem is the formation and transmission of human capital which, as we
have seen, implies the parents having the time for educational care and so
on. A wealthy family, that is to say, a high income family, that is to say, a
family whose components have a high human capital, will have as its
immediate and rational economic project the transmission of a human
capital at least as high to its children, which implies a set of investments,
both in financial terms and in terms of time, on the part of the parents.21 March 1979
245
Now these investments are not possible for a large family. So, according
to the American neo-liberals, it is the necessity to transmit a human
capital to the children which is at least equal to that of the parents that
explains the smaller size of wealthy families.
It is still in terms of this same project, this same perspective of an eco-
nomic analysis of types of relations that previously fell more in the
domains of demography, sociology, psychology, and social psychology, that
the neo-liberals have tried to analyze, for example, the phenomena of
marriage and what takes place within a household, that is to say, the
specifically economic rationalization constituted by marriage in the coex-
istence of individuals. There are a number of works and communications
on this by a Canadian economist Jean-Luc Migué, 9 who wrote this, which
is worth reading. 10 I will not go into the rest of the analysis, but he says
this: “One of the great recent contributions of economic analysis [he is
referring to the neo-liberal analysis; M.F.] has been to apply fully to the
domestic sector the analytical framework traditionally reserved for the
firm and the consumer ( ... ). This involves making the household a unit
of production in the same way as the classical firm. ( ... ) What in actual
fact is the household if not the contractual commitment of two parties to
supply specific inputs and to share in given proportions the benefits of the
households’ output?” What is the meaning of the long-term contract
entered into by people who live together in matrimony? What justifies it
economically and on what is it based? Well, it is that this long-term con-
tract between spouses enables them to avoid constantly renegotiating at
every moment the innumerable contracts which would have to be made in
order for domestic life to function. 11 Pass me the salt; I will give you the
pepper. This type of negotiation is resolved, as it were, by a long-term
contract, which is the marriage contract itself, which enables what the
neo-liberals call—and I think they are not the only ones to call it this
moreover—an economy to be made at the level of transaction costs. If you
had to make a transaction for each of these actions there would be a cost
of time, and therefore an economic cost, that would be absolutely in-
superable for the individuals. It is resolved by the marriage contract.
This may appear amusing, but those of you who are familiar with the
text left by Pierre Rivière before his death, in which he describes how
his parents lived, 12 will realize that in fact the married life of a peasant246
t h e b i rt h o f b i o p o l i t i c s
couple at the beginning of the nineteenth century was endlessly forged
and woven by a whole series of transactions. I will work on your field,
the man says to the woman, but on condition that I can make love with
you. And the woman says: You will not make love with me so long as you
have not fed my chickens. In a process like this we see a sort of endless
transaction emerging, in relation to which the marriage contract was
supposed to constitute a form of general economy to avoid having to
renegotiate at every moment. And in a way, the relationship between the
father and the mother, between the man and the woman, was just the
daily unfolding of this kind of contractualization of their common life,
and all these conflicts were nothing other than the actualization of the
contract. But at the same time the contract did not perform its role: in
actual fact it did not [enable]* an economy to be made on the transac-
tion costs that it should have assured. In short, let’s say that in these
economic analyses of the neo-liberals, we have an attempt to decipher
traditionally non-economic social behavior in economic terms.
The second interesting use of these neo-liberal analyses is that the
economic grid will or should make it possible to test governmental
action, gauge its validity, and to object to activities of the public author-
ities on the grounds of their abuses, excesses, futility, and wasteful
expenditure. In short, the economic grid is not applied in this case in
order to understand social processes and make them intelligible; it
involves anchoring and justifying a permanent political criticism of polit-
ical and governmental action. It involves scrutinizing every action of the
public authorities in terms of the game of supply and demand, in terms
of efficiency with regard to the particular elements of this game, and in
terms of the cost of intervention by the public authorities in the field of
the market. In short, it involves criticism of the governmentality actually
exercised which is not just a political or juridical criticism; it is a market
criticism, the cynicism of a market criticism opposed to the action of
public authorities. This is not just an empty project or a theorist’s idea.
In the United States a permanent exercise of this type of criticism has
developed especially in an institution which was not in fact created for
* M.F.: avoid21 March 1979
247
this, since it was created before the development of the neo-liberal school,
before the development of the Chicago School. This institution is the
American Enterprise Institute 13 whose essential function, now, is to measure
all public activities in cost-benefit terms, whether these activities be the
famous big social programs concerning, for example, education, health,
and racial segregation developed by the Kennedy and Johnson adminis-
trations in the decade 1960–1970. This type of criticism also involves
measuring the activity of the numerous federal agencies established since
the New Deal and especially since the end of the Second World War, such
as the Food and Health Administration, the Federal Trade Commission, and so
on. 14 So, it is criticism in the form of what could be called an “economic
positivism”; a permanent criticism of governmental policy.
Seeing the deployment of this type of criticism one cannot help
thinking of an analogy, which I will leave as such: the positivist critique
of ordinary language. When you consider the way in which the
Americans have employed logic, the logical positivism of the Vienna
School, in order to apply it to scientific, philosophical, or everyday dis-
course, you see there too a kind of filtering of every statement whatso-
ever in terms of contradiction, lack of consistency, nonsense. 15 To some
extent we can say that the economic critique the neo-liberals try to
apply to governmental policy is also a filtering of every action by the
public authorities in terms of contradiction, lack of consistency, and
nonsense. The general form of the market becomes an instrument, a tool
of discrimination in the debate with the administration. In other words,
in classical liberalism the government was called upon to respect the
form of the market and laisser-faire. Here, laissez-faire is turned into a
do-not-laisser-faire government, in the name of a law of the market which
will enable each of its activities to be measured and assessed. Laissez-faire
is thus turned round, and the market is no longer a principle of govern-
ment’s self-limitation; it is a principle turned against it. It is a sort of
permanent economic tribunal confronting government. Faced with
excessive governmental action, and in opposition to it, the nineteenth
century sought to establish a sort of administrative jurisdiction that
would enable the action of public authorities to be assessed in terms of
right, whereas here we have a sort of economic tribunal that claims to
assess government action in strictly economic and market terms.248
t h e b i rt h o f b i o p o l i t i c s
These two aspects—the analysis of non-economic behavior through a
grid of economic intelligibility, and the criticism and appraisal of the
action of public authorities in market terms—are found again in the
analysis of criminality and the penal justice system made by some neo-
liberals. I would like now to talk about the way in which the problem of
criminality is taken up in a series of articles by Ehrlich, 16 Stigler, 17 and
Gary Becker 18 as an example of these two uses of economic analysis.
Their analysis of criminality at first appears to be the simplest possible
return to the eighteenth century reformers like Beccaria 19 and especially
Bentham. 20 After all, it is true that when the problem of the reform of
penal law is taken up at the end of the eighteenth century the question
posed by the reformers really was a question of political economy, in the
sense that it involved an economic analysis or at any rate an economic
style of reflection on politics or the exercise of power. It was a matter of
using economic calculation, or at any rate of appealing to an economic
logic and rationality to criticize the operation of penal justice as it could
be observed in the eighteenth century. Hence, in some texts, more
clearly in Bentham than in Beccaria, but also in people like
Colquhoun, 21 there are considerations based on rough calculations of the
cost of delinquency: how much does it cost a country, or at any rate a
town, to have thieves running free? There is the problem of the cost of
judicial practice itself and of the judicial institution in the way that it
operates. And there is criticism of the ineffectiveness of the system of
punishment, with reference to the fact, for example, that public torture
and executions or banishment had no perceptible effect on lowering the
rate of criminality, insofar as it was possible to measure this at the time.
In any case, there was an economic grid underlying the critical reason-
ing of the eighteenth century reformer. I have already drawn attention to
this 22 and will not dwell on it.
What the reformers sought by filtering the whole of penal practice
through a calculation of utility was precisely a penal system with the
lowest possible cost, in all the senses I have just mentioned. And I think
we can say that the solution sketched by Beccaria, supported by
Bentham, and ultimately chosen by the legislators and codifiers at the
end of the eighteenth and beginning of the nineteenth century was a
legalistic solution. This great concern of the law, the principle constantly21 March 1979
249
recalled that for a penal system to function well a good law is necessary
and almost sufficient, was nothing other than the desire for what could
be called, in economic terms, a reduction in the transaction cost. The law
is the most economical solution for punishing people adequately and for
this punishment to be effective. First, the crime must be defined as an
infraction of a formulated law, so that in the absence of a law there is no
crime and an action cannot be incriminated. Second, penalties must be
fixed once and for all by the law. Third, penalties must be fixed in law
according to the degree of seriousness of the crime. Fourth, henceforth
the criminal court will only have one thing to do, which is to apply to
an established and proven crime a law which determines in advance
what penalty the criminal must suffer according to the seriousness of his
crime. 23 An absolutely simple, apparently completely obvious mechan-
ics constitutes the most economic form, that is to say, the least costly and
most effective form for obtaining punishment and the elimination of
conducts deemed harmful to society. At the end of the eighteenth cen-
tury, law, the mechanism of the law, was adopted as the economic prin-
ciple of penal power, in both the widest and most exact sense of the
word economic. Homo penalis, the man who can legally be punished, the
man exposed to the law and who can be punished by the law is strictly
speaking a homo œconomicus. And it is precisely the law which enables the
problem of penal practice to be connected to the problem of economy.
During the nineteenth century it was discovered that this economy in
fact led to a paradoxical effect. What is the source, the reason for this
paradoxical effect? It is an ambiguity due to the fact that the law as law,
as general form of the penal economy, was obviously indexed to the acts
which breach the law. The law only sanctions acts, of course. But, in
another respect, the principles of the existence of the criminal law, the
need to punish in other words, as well as the grading of punishment, the
actual application of the law, only have meaning inasmuch as it is not
the act that is punished—since there is no sense in punishing an act—but
an individual, an offender, who must be punished, corrected, and made to
serve as an example to other possible offenders. So we can see how it was
possible for an inner tendency of the whole system to emerge in this
ambiguity between a form of the law which defines a relationship
between the act and the actual application of the law which can only be250
t h e b i rt h o f b i o p o l i t i c s
directed at an individual, in this ambiguity between the crime and the
criminal. A tendency towards what? Well, it is a tendency towards an
increasingly individualizing modulation of the application of the law
and, as a consequence of this, a reciprocally psychological, sociological,
and anthropological problematization of the person on whom the law is
applied. That is to say, throughout the nineteenth century, the homo
penalis drifts towards what could be called the homo criminalis. And when
criminology is formed at the end of the nineteenth century, exactly one
century after the reform recommended by Beccaria and schematized by
Bentham, when homo criminalis is formed a century later, we arrived in a
sense at the end of the ambiguity. Homo legalis, homo penalis is now taken
up within an anthropology of crime which replaces, of course, the rigor-
ous and very economic mechanics of the law: there is an inflation of forms
and bodies of knowledge, of discourse, a multiplication of authorities and
decision-making elements, and the parasitic invasion of the sentence in
the name of the law by individualizing measures in the name of the
norm. So that the economic principle of reference to the law and of the
pure mechanism of the law, this rigorous economy, lead to an inflation
within which the legal system has continued to flounder since the end of
the nineteenth century. Anyway, this is how I would see things were I to
adopt a possible neo-liberal perspective on this evolution.
So the analysis of the neo-liberals, who are not concerned with these
historical problems, Gary Becker’s analysis—in an article entitled
“Crime and punishment” which appeared in the Journal of Political
Economy in 1968 24 —basically consists in taking up Beccaria’s and
Bentham’s utilitarian filter again while as far as possible trying [to
avoid]* the series of slippages which took us from homo œconomicus to homo
legalis, to homo penalis, and finally to homo criminalis. It consists in keeping
as far as possible, and thanks to a purely economic analysis, to homo œco-
nomicus and to seeing how crime and maybe criminality can be analyzed
on that basis. In other words, the analysis tries to neutralize all those
effects that arise when—as in the case of Beccaria and Bentham—one
seeks to reconsider the economic problems and give them a form within
* Conjecture; word omitted.21 March 1979
251
an absolutely adequate legal framework. In other words—and here again
I am not saying what they say, since [history is not their problem],* but
I think the neo-liberals could say this—the fault, the source of the slip-
page in eighteenth century criminal law, was Beccaria’s and Bentham’s
idea that the utilitarian calculus could be given an adequate form within
a legal structure. The idea of utility taking shape within law and law
being constructed entirely on the basis of a calculus of utility really was
one of the stakes or dreams of all political criticism and all the projects of
the end of the eighteenth century. The history of criminal law has shown
that the perfect fit could not be made. Therefore it is necessary to
maintain the problem of homo œconomicus without aiming to translate it
immediately into the terms and forms of a legal structure.
So, how do they go about analyzing or maintaining the analysis of the
problem of crime within an economic problematic? First, the definition
of crime. In his article “Crime and punishment” Becker gives this defin-
ition of crime: I call crime any action that makes the individual run the
risk of being condemned to a penalty. 25 [Some laughter.] I am surprised
you laugh, because it is after all very roughly the definition of crime given
by the French penal code, and so of the codes inspired by it, since you are
well aware how the code defines a criminal offence: a criminal offence is
that which is punished by correctional penalties. What is a crime accord-
ing to the penal code, that is to say, your penal code? It is that which is
punished by physical penalties involving the loss of civil rights. 26 In
other words, the penal code does not give any substantive, qualitative, or
moral definition of the crime. The crime is that which is punished by the
law, and that’s all there is to it. So, you can see that the neo-liberals’ def-
inition is very close: crime is that which makes the individual incur the
risk of being sentenced to a penalty. It is very close, with however, as you
can see, a difference, which is a difference of point of view, since while
avoiding giving a substantive definition of the crime, the code adopts the
point of view of the act and asks what this act is, in short, how to char-
acterize an act which we can call criminal, that is to say, which is pun-
ished precisely as a crime. It is the point of view of the act, a kind of
* A set of words which are difficult to hear.252
t h e b i rt h o f b i o p o l i t i c s
operational characterization, as it were, which can be employed by the
judge: You will have to consider as a crime any act which is punished by
the law. It is an objective, operational definition made from the judge’s
point of view. You can see that it is the same definition when the neo-
liberals say that crime is any action which makes an individual run the
risk of being sentenced to a penalty, but the point of view has changed.
We now adopt the point of view of the person who commits the crime, or
who will commit the crime, while keeping the same content of the def-
inition. We ask: What is the crime for him, that is to say, for the subject
of an action, for the subject of a form of conduct or behavior? Well, it is
whatever it is that puts him at risk of punishment.
You can see that this is basically the same kind of shift of point of
view as that carried out with regard to human capital and work. Last
week I tried to show you how the neo-liberals tried to address the prob-
lem of work from the point of view of the person who decides to work
rather from the point of view of capital or of economic mechanisms.
Here again we move over to the side of individual subject, but doing this
does not involve throwing psychological knowledge or an anthropo-
logical content into the analysis, just as analyzing work from the point
of view of the worker did not involve an anthropology of work. We only
move over to the side of the subject himself inasmuch as—and we will
come back to this, because it is very important, I am telling you this in
a very rough way—we can approach it through the angle, the aspect, the
kind of network of intelligibility of his behavior as economic behavior.
The subject is considered only as homo œconomicus, which does not mean
that the whole subject is considered as homo œconomicus. In other words,
considering the subject as homo œconomicus does not imply an anthropo-
logical identification of any behavior whatsoever with economic behav-
ior. It simply means that economic behavior is the grid of intelligibility
one will adopt on the behavior of a new individual. It also means that
the individual becomes governmentalizable,* that power gets a hold on
him to the extent, and only to the extent, that he is a homo œconomicus. That
is to say, the surface of contact between the individual and the power
* Foucault stumbles a bit on this word, adding: or government ... , well, yes, governmentalizable.21 March 1979
253
exercised on him, and so the principle of the regulation of power over the
individual, will be only this kind of grid of homo œconomicus. Homo œconom-
icus is the interface of government and the individual. But this does not
mean that every individual, every subject is an economic man.
So we move over to the side of the individual subject by considering
him as homo œconomicus, with the consequence that if crime is defined in
this way as the action an individual commits by taking the risk of being
punished by the law, then you can see that there is no difference between
an infraction of the highway code and a premeditated murder. This also
means that in this perspective the criminal is not distinguished in any
way by or interrogated on the basis of moral or anthropological traits.
The criminal is nothing other than absolutely anyone whomsoever. The
criminal, any person, is treated only as anyone whomsoever who invests
in an action, expects a profit from it, and who accepts the risk of a loss.
From this point of view, the criminal is and must remain nothing more
than this. You can see that in view of this the penal system will no
longer have to concern itself with that split reality of the crime and the
criminal. It has to concern itself with a conduct or a series of conducts
which produce actions from which the actors expect a profit and which
carry a special risk, which is not just the risk of economic loss, but the
penal risk, or that economic loss which is inflicted by a penal system.
The penal system itself will not have to deal with criminals, but with
those people who produce that type of action. In other words, it will
have to react to the supply of crime.
What will punishment be under these conditions? Well, punishment—
and here again I am referring to Becker’s definition—is the means
employed to limit the negative externalities 27 of certain acts. 28 Here again,
you can see that we are very close to Beccaria or Bentham, to the eigh-
teenth century problematic in which punishment is justified by the fact
that the act punished was harmful and that a law was made precisely for
that reason. The same principle also had to be applied to the scale of the
punishment: You had to punish in such a way that the action’s harmful
effects are either annulled or prevented. So, we are still very close to the
problematic of the eighteenth century, but, here again, with an impor-
tant change. While classical theory simply tried to connect up the differ-
ent, heterogeneous effects expected from punishment, that is to say, the254
t h e b i rt h o f b i o p o l i t i c s
problem of reparation, which is a civil problem, the problem of the indi-
vidual’s correction, and the problem of prevention with regard to other
individuals, etcetera, the neo-liberals will make a connection, or rather, a
different disconnection of punishment. They distinguish between two
things, or rather, they basically only take up a problematic current in
Anglo-Saxon legal thought and reflection. They say: On the one hand
there is the law, but what is the law? The law is nothing other than a
prohibition, and the formulation of the prohibition is, on the one hand,
of course, an institutional reality. Referring to a different problematic, we
could say, if you like, that it is a speech act with a number of effects. 29 This
act, moreover, has a certain cost, since formulation of the law implies a
parliament, discussion, and decisions taken. It is in fact a reality, but it is
not only this reality. So then, on the other hand, there is the set of instru-
ments by which this prohibition will be given a real “force.”* This idea of
a force of law is expressed in the frequently encountered word, enforcement,
which is often translated in French by “reinforcement (renforcement)” of
the law. It is not reinforcement. Law enforcement is more than the applica-
tion of the law, since it involves a whole series of real instruments which
have to be employed in order to apply the law. But this is not the rein-
forcement of the law, it is less than the reinforcement of the law, inasmuch
as reinforcement would mean that the law is too weak and that it needs a
small supplement or to be made stricter. Law enforcement is the set of
instruments employed to give social and political reality to the act of
prohibition in which the formulation of the law consists.
What will these instruments of law “enforcement” be—forgive the
neologism of this transcription? † It will be the quantity of punishment
provided for each crime. It will be the size, activity, zeal, and compe-
tence of the apparatus responsible for detecting crimes. It will be the
size and quality of the apparatus responsible for convicting criminals
and providing effective proof that they have committed a crime. It will
be how quickly judges make their judgments, and how severe they are
within the margins the law leaves them. It will also be the degree of
effectiveness of punishment, and the degree to which the penalty
* In inverted commas in the manuscript.
†
Foucault creates a French word—enforcement—to translate the English “enforcement”; G.B.21 March 1979
255
applied can be modified, lessened, or possibly increased by the prison
administration. All of these things constitute law enforcement, every-
thing therefore that will respond to the supply of criminal conduct with
what is called a negative demand. Law enforcement is the set of instru-
ments of action which, on the market for crime, opposes a negative
demand to the supply of crime. Now this law enforcement is clearly nei-
ther neutral nor indefinitely extendable for two correlative reasons.
The first, of course, is that the supply of crime is not indefinitely or
uniformly elastic. That is to say, it does not respond in the same way to all
the forms and levels of the negative demand opposed to it. To put things
very simply: you have certain forms of crime, or certain brackets of crimi-
nal behavior, which give way very easily before a modification or very
slight intensification of negative demand. Take the most current example:
consider a big store in which 20% of the turnover, a completely arbitrary
figure, is misappropriated by theft. Now, it is easy to reduce this figure to
10% without making a considerable outlay on surveillance or excessive
law enforcement. To reduce it to between 5% and 10% is still relatively
easy. To manage to reduce it to below 5% becomes very difficult, below
2%, and so on. In the same way, it is clear that there is a whole primary
bracket of crimes of passion which we could easily get rid of by making
divorce easier. And then you have a core of crimes of passion which will
not be changed by relaxing divorce law. So the elasticity, that is to say, the
modification of supply in relation to the effects of negative demand, is not
homogeneous in the different brackets or types of action considered.
Second, and this is a different aspect absolutely linked to the first,
enforcement itself has a cost and negative externalities. It has a cost, that
is to say, it calls for an alternative remuneration. Investment in the law
enforcement apparatus cannot be employed elsewhere. It goes without
saying that this calls for an alternative remuneration. It has a cost, that is
to say, it involves political, social, and other drawbacks. So, the objective
or target of a penal policy will not be the same as that of the eighteenth
century reformers when they developed their system of universal legality,
namely, the total disappearance of crime. Criminal law and the whole
penal mechanism of Bentham’s dreams had to be such that, at the end of
the day, there would be no crime, even if this could never happen in real-
ity. And the idea of the Panopticon—the idea of transparency, of a gaze256
t h e b i rt h o f b i o p o l i t i c s
focusing on each individual, of a scale of penalties sufficiently subtle that
every individual in his calculations, in his heart of hearts, in his economic
calculation, could say to himself: No, in no way, if I were to commit this
crime, the penalty I would incur is too significant, and so I am not going
to commit it—the idea of having this kind of general nullification of
crime in its sights, was the principle of rationality, the organizing princi-
ple of penal calculation in the reforming mind of the eighteenth century.
Here, instead, penal policy has absolutely renounced the objective of the
complete suppression and exhaustive nullification of crime. The regula-
tory principle of penal policy is a simple intervention in the market for
crime and in relation to the supply of crime. It is an intervention which
will limit the supply of crime solely by a negative demand, the cost of
which must obviously never exceed the cost of the supply of the crimi-
nality in question. This is the definition that Stigler gives of the objective
of a penal policy: “The goal of law enforcement,” he says, “is to achieve a
degree of compliance with the rule of prescribed behavior that society
believes it can procure while taking account of the fact that enforcement
is costly.” This is in the Journal of Political Economy in 1970. 30 You can see
that at this point society appears as the consumer of conforming behav-
ior, that is to say, according to the neo-liberal theory of consumption,
society appears as the producer of conforming behavior with which it is
satisfied in return for a certain investment. Consequently, good penal
policy does not aim at the extinction of crime, but at a balance between
the curves of the supply of crime and negative demand. Or again: society
does not have a limitless need for compliance. Society does not need to
conform to an exhaustive disciplinary system. A society finds that it has
a certain level of illegality and it would find it very difficult to have this
rate indefinitely reduced. This amounts to posing as the essential ques-
tion of penal policy, not, how should crimes be punished, nor even, what
actions should be seen as crimes, but, what crime should we tolerate? Or
again: what would it be intolerable to tolerate? This is Becker’s definition
in “Crime and punishment.” There are two questions, he says: “How
many offences should be permitted? Second, how many offenders should
go unpunished?” 31 This is the question of penal practice.
What does this give us in concrete terms? There are not many analyses
in this style. There is an analysis of the death penalty by Ehrlich in which21 March 1979
257
he concludes that, in the end, the death penalty is after all quite useful. 32
But let’s leave this. This genre of analysis does not seem to me to be the
most interesting or effective with regard to the object it deals with. On
the other hand, it is certain that in [other] domains, and in particular
where criminality more closely affects market phenomena, the results are
a bit more interesting to discuss. Obviously, being itself a market phe-
nomenon, the problem of drugs is subject to a much more accessible and
immediate economic analysis, an economics of criminality. 33 Drugs, then,
appear as a market and let’s say that, roughly up until the seventies, the
policy of law enforcement with regard to drugs was basically aimed at
reducing the drug supply. What did reducing the supply of drugs, drugs
crime, and drugs delinquency mean? It meant, of course, reducing the
amount of drugs brought onto the market. And what did this mean? It
meant controlling and dismantling the refining networks and, secondly,
controlling and dismantling the distribution networks. Now we know
full well what the results of this policy of the sixties were. What was
achieved by dismantling the refining and distribution networks, albeit
only partially and never completely, for reasons we could discuss? First,
it increased the unit price of the drug. Second, it favored and strength-
ened the monopoly or oligopoly of some big drug sellers, traffickers, and
big drug refining and distribution networks, with, as a monopoly or oli-
gopoly effect, a rise in prices, inasmuch as the laws of the market and
competition were not respected. And finally, third, another more impor-
tant phenomenon at the level of criminality strictly speaking, is that drug
consumption, the demand for drugs, at least for serious addicts and for
particular drugs, is absolutely inelastic. That is to say, the addict will
want to find his commodity and will be prepared to pay any price for it.
And this inelasticity of a segment of the demand for drugs will increase
criminality; in plain terms, one will bump off someone in the street for
the ten dollars to buy the drug one needs. So, from this point of view, the
legislation, the style of legislation, or rather, the style of law enforcement
which was developed in the sixties proved to be a sensational failure.
From this came the second solution, formulated in terms of liberal
economics by Eatherly and Moore in 1973. 34 They say: It is completely
mad to want to limit the supply of drugs. We should free up the drug
supply, that is to say, very generally and roughly, see to it that the drug258
t h e b i rt h o f b i o p o l i t i c s
is more accessible and less costly, but with the following modulations
and points. What in actual fact takes place in the real drugs market?
There are basically two categories of buyers and people looking for
drugs: those who begin to consume drugs and whose demand is elastic
because they may come up against excessively high prices and forgo con-
sumption of the drug which certainly offers them pleasure, but which
they cannot afford. And then you have the inelastic demand, that is to
say, those who will buy it anyway whatever the price. What, then, is the
attitude of the drug pushers? It is to offer a relatively low market price
to the consumers whose demand is elastic, that is to say, to the begin-
ners, the small consumers, and when—and only when—they have
become habitual consumers, that is to say, when their demand has
become inelastic, the price will be raised and the drugs provided will
have the extremely high monopolistic prices which result in the phe-
nomena of criminality. So what should the attitude be of those who
direct law enforcement policy? They will have to ensure that what is
called the opening price, that is to say, the price for new consumers, is
as high as possible so that price itself is a weapon of dissuasion and
small, potential consumers cannot take the step of becoming consumers
because of the economic threshold. On the other hand, those whose
demand is inelastic and who will pay any price should be given the drug
at the best possible price, that is to say, at the lowest possible price, so
that, since they will buy the drug anyway, they are not forced to get the
money by any means to buy it—in other words, [so] that their drug
consumption does not encourage crime. So we need low prices for
addicts and very high prices for non-addicts. You know that this is a
view which sought expression in a policy of distinguishing not so much
between so-called soft drugs and hard drugs, as between drugs with an
inductive value and drugs without an inductive value, and above all
between elastic and inelastic types of drug consumption. From this stems
a policy of law enforcement directed towards new and potential con-
sumers, small dealers, and the small trade that takes place on street cor-
ners; a policy of law enforcement according to an economic rationality of
the market differentiated in terms of the elements I have referred to.
What conclusions can be drawn from all this? First of all, there is an
anthropological erasure of the criminal. It should be said that this does21 March 1979
259
not mean that the level of the individual is suppressed,* but rather that an
element, dimension, or level of behavior can be postulated which can be
interpreted as economic behavior and controlled as such. † In his article on
capital punishment, Ehrlich said: “The abhorrent, cruel, or pathological
nature of the crime is of absolutely no importance. There are no reasons
for thinking that people who love or hate others are less ‘responsive,’ ‡ less
accessible, or respond less easily to changes in the gains and losses associ-
ated with their activity than persons indifferent toward the well-being of
others.” 35 In other words, all the distinctions that have been made
between born criminals, occasional criminals, the perverse and the not
perverse, and recidivists are not important. We must be prepared to accept
that, in any case, however pathological the subject may be at a certain level
and when seen from a certain angle, he is nevertheless “responsive” to
some extent to possible gains and losses, which means that penal action
must act on the interplay of gains and losses or, in other words, on the
environment; we must act on the market milieu in which the individual
makes his supply of crime and encounters a positive or negative demand.
This raises the problem, which I will talk about next week, of the new
techniques of environmental technology or environmental psychology
which I think are linked to neo-liberalism in the United States.
Second, but I will come back to this too, 36 you can see that what
appears on the horizon of this kind of analysis is not at all the ideal or
project of an exhaustively disciplinary society in which the legal net-
work hemming in individuals is taken over and extended internally by,
let’s say, normative mechanisms. Nor is it a society in which a mecha-
nism of general normalization and the exclusion of those who cannot be
normalized is needed. On the horizon of this analysis we see instead the
image, idea, or theme-program of a society in which there is an
optimization of systems of difference, in which the field is left open to
fluctuating processes, in which minority individuals and practices are
* The manuscript, p. 19, adds: “not a nullification of the technologies aiming to influence
individual behavior.”
†
Ibid.: “An economic subject is a subject who, in the strict sense, seeks in any case to maximize
his profit, to optimize the gain/loss relationship; in the broad sense: the person whose conduct
is influenced by the gains and losses associated with it.”
‡
In English in the lecture; G.B.260
t h e b i rt h o f b i o p o l i t i c s
tolerated, in which action is brought to bear on the rules of the game
rather than on the players, and finally in which there is an environmen-
tal type of intervention instead of the internal subjugation of individuals.
I will try to develop some of all this next week. 37 *
* The manuscript includes here six unnumbered pages, which continue the preceding argument:
“These kinds of analysis pose a number of problems.
1. Concerning human technology
On the one hand, a massive withdrawal with regard to the normative-disciplinary system. The
correlate of the system formed by a capitalist type of economy and political institutions indexed
to the law was a technology of human behavior, an ‘individualizing’ governmentality compris-
ing: disciplinary control (quadrillage), unlimited regulation, subordination/classification, the
norm.
[2nd page] Considered overall, liberal governmentality was both legalistic and normalizing, dis-
ciplinary regulation being the switch-point between the two aspects. With, of course, a series of
problems concerning
—autonomy, the [ ... ]ation [division into sectors (sectorisation)?] of spaces and [ ... ] regulation
—the ultimate incompatibility between legal forms and normalization.
This system no longer seems to be indispensable. Why? Because the great idea that the law was
the principle of governmental frugality turns out to be inadequate:
—because ‘the law’ does not exist as [principle?]. You [can have?] as many laws as you like, the
overflow with regard to the law is part of the legal system.
—[3rd page] because the law can only function ballasted by something else that is its counter-
weight, its interstices, its supplement → prohibition (interdiction).
It is necessary
1 to change the conception of law, or at least elucidate its function. In other words, not confuse
its form (which is always to prohibit and constrain) and its function, which must be that of rule
of the game. The law is that which must favor the game, i.e., the [ ... ]ations, enterprises, initia-
tives, changes, and by enabling everybody to be a rational subject, i.e., to maximize the func-
tions of utility.
2 and consider calculating its ‘enforcement’ instead of supplementing it with regulation, plan-
ning, and discipline
—that is to say, we must not ballast it with something else, but with that which must simply
give it force;
—[4th page] but while saying clearly that this enforcement is basically the main element,
—because the law does not exist without it
—because it is elastic
—because it can be calculated
How to remain in the Rule of law [English in the manuscript; G.B.]? How to
rationalize this enforcement, it being understood that the law itself cannot be a principle of
rationalization?
—through the calculation of costs
—the utility of the law
—and the cost of its enforcement
—and by the fact that if you do not want to get out of the law and you do not want to divert its
true function as rule of the game, the technology to be employed is not discipline-normalization,
but action on the environment. Modifying the terms of the game, not the players’ mentality.21 March 1979
261
[5th page] We have here a radicalization of what the German ordoliberals had already defined
with regard to governmental action: leave the economic game as free as possible and create a
Gesellschaftspolitik. The American liberals say: if you want to maintain this Gesellschaftspolitik in
the order of the law, you must consider everyone as a player and only intervene on an environ-
ment in which he is able to play. An environmental technology whose main aspects are:
—the definition of a framework around the individual which is loose enough for him to be able
to play;
—the possibility for the individual of regulation of the effects of the definition of his own
framework;
—the regulation of environmental effects
—non damage
—non absorption
—the autonomy of these environmental spaces.
[6th page] Not a standardizing, identificatory, hierarchical individualization, but an environ-
mentalism open to unknowns and transversal phenomena. Lateralism.
Technology of the environment, unknowns, freedoms of [interplays?] between supplies and
demands.
—But does this mean that we are dealing with natural subjects?” [end of the manuscript]262
t h e b i rt h o f b i o p o l i t i c s
1. See above, lecture of 14 February 1979, pp. 145–146.
2. See F. Bilger, La Pensée économique libérale, p. 186: “The sociological policy breaks
down ... into several, very varied particular policies of which the main ones are, for these
authors, a development of the economic space, an encouragement of small and medium
sized enterprises, and above all a de-proletarianization of society through the development
of private saving and the widest possible distribution of the national capital between all
the citizens. By making all individuals capitalists, by establishing a popular capitalism, the
social flaws of capitalism are eliminated, and this independently of the fact of an expand-
ing ‘salariat’ in the economy. Someone earning a salary who is also a capitalist is no longer
a proletarian.”
3. See above, lecture of 14 February 1979, p. 148.
4. See above, lectures of 14 and 21 February 1979.
5. A. Rüstow, in Colloque Walter Lippmann, p. 83: “If, in the interests of the optimum produc-
tivity of the collectivity and the maximum independence of the individual, we organize the
economy of the social body according to the rules of the market economy, there remain new
and heightened needs for integration to be satisfied.”
6. W. Röpke, The Social Crisis of Our Times, Part II, ch. 2, p. 236: “( ... ) we have no inten-
tion to demand more from competition than it can give. It is a means of establishing
order and exercising control in the narrow sphere of a market economy based on the divi-
sion of labor, but not a principle on which a whole society can be built. From the socio-
logical and moral point of view it is even dangerous because it tends more to dissolve than
to unite. If competition is not to have the effect of a social explosive and is at the same
time not to degenerate, its premise will be a correspondingly sound political and moral
framework.”
7. Ibid.: “( ... ) a strong state, aloof from the hungry hordes of vested interests, a high standard
of business ethics, an undegenerated community of people ready to cooperate with each
other, who have a natural attachment to, and a firm place in society.”
8. See the previous lecture, 14 March, pp. 229–230.
9. Jean-Luc Migué was then professor at the National School of Public Administration of
Quebec.
10. “Méthodologie économique et économie non marchand,” communication to the
Congress of French-speaking Economists (Quebec, May 1976), partially reproduced in
the Revue d’économie politique, July-August 1977 (see H. Lepage, Demain le capitalisme,
p. 224).
11. J.L. Migué, cited by H. Lepage, Demain le capitalisme, p. 346: “One of the great recent con-
tributions of economic analysis has been the full application to the domestic sector of the
analytical framework traditionally reserved for the firm and the consumer. By making the
household a unit of production in the same way as the classical firm, we discover that its
analytical foundations are actually identical to those of the firm. As in the firm, the two
parties living together, thanks to a contract that binds them for long periods, avoid the
transaction costs and the risk of being deprived at any moment of the inputs of the spouse
and, hence, of the common output of the household. What in actual fact is the household if
not the contractual commitment of two parties to supply specific inputs and to share in
given proportions the benefits of the household’s output? In this way then, instead of engag-
ing in a costly process of constantly renegotiating and supervising the innumerable contracts
inherent in the exchanges of everyday life, the two parties fix in a long term contract the
general terms of exchange that will govern them.”
12. See, Moi, Pierre Rivière, ayant égorgé ma mère, ma sœur et mon frère ... , presented by Michel
Foucault (Paris: Julliard, 1973); English translation by F. Jellinek, I, Pierre Rivière ...
(New York: Pantheon, 1978, and Harmondsworth: Penguin, 1984).
13. Created in 1943, the American Enterprise Institute for Public Policy Research (AEI) is based in
Washington. Spearhead of the deregulation struggle, through its publications (books,
articles, reports) it represents one of the most important “think tanks” of American neo-
conservativism.
14. Among these other agencies there are the Consumer Safety Product Commission, the
Occupational Safety and Health Commission, the Civil Aeronautics Board, the Federal21 March 1979
15.
16.
17.
18.
19.
20.
21.
22.
23.
24.
25.
26.
263
Communications Commission, and the Security Exchange Commission (see H. Lepage, Demain le
capitalisme, pp. 221–222).
As the later allusion to the theory of speech acts (p. 254) suggests, it is doubtless the works
of J.R. Searle, one of the American representatives of analytical philosophy, to which
Foucault is implicitly referring here. See below, this lecture, note 29. The lecture given in
Tokyo the previous year, “La philosophie analytique de la politique” Dits et Écrits, 3,
pp. 534–551, is evidence of his interest in “Anglo-American analytical philosophy” during
these years: “After all, Anglo-Saxon analytical philosophy does not give itself the task of
reflecting on the being of language or on the deep structures of language: it reflects on the
everyday use of language in different types of discourse. Anglo-Saxon analytical philosophy
involves a critical analysis of thought on the basis of the way in which one says things”
(p. 541).
I. Ehrlich, “The deterrent effect of capital punishment: a question of life and death,”
American Economic Review, vol. 65 (3), June 1975, pp. 397–417.
George J. Stigler (1911–1991): professor at the University of Chicago from 1958 to 1981,
researcher at the National Bureau of Economic Research from 1941 to 1976, he directed the
Journal of Political Economy from 1973 until his death. He won the Nobel Prize for econom-
ics in 1982. Foucault refers here to his article “The optimum enforcement of laws,” Journal
of Political Economy, vol. 78 (3), May-June 1970, pp. 526–536.
G. Becker, “Crime and punishment: an economic approach,” Journal of Political Economy,
vol. 76 (2), March-April 1968, pp. 196–217; reprinted in his The Economic Approach to
Human Behavior, pp. 39–85. On these three authors cited by Foucault, see F. Jenny, “La
théorie économique du crime: une revue de la littérature” in J.-J. Rosa and F. Aftalion, eds.,
L’Économique retrouvée, pp. 296–324 (Foucault draws on information provided in this arti-
cle). See also, since then, G. Radnitsky and P. Bernholz, eds., Economic Imperialism: The
Economic Approach applied outside the field of economics (New York: Paragon House, 1987).
See above, lecture of 17 January 1979, note 10.
Jeremy Bentham (see above, lecture of 10 January 1979, p. 12); see in particular the Traités
de législation civile et pénale, ed. E. Dumont (Paris: Boussange, Masson & Besson, 1802) and
Théorie des peines et des récompenses, ed. E. Dumont (London: B. Dulau, 1811) 2 volumes. It
was these adaptations-translations by Dumont, based on Bentham’s manuscripts, which
made the latter’s thought known at the beginning of the nineteenth century. On the gen-
esis of the edition of the Traités de législation civile et pénale based on Bentham’s manuscripts,
see E. Halévy, La Formation du radicalisme philosophique ([vol. 1, Paris: F. Alcan, 1901] Paris:
PUF, 1995) Appendix 1, pp. 281–285; English translation by Mary Morris, The Growth of
Philosophical Radicalism (London: Faber & Faber, 1972), Appendix “Traités de Législation
Civile et Pénale,” pp. 515–521. The first English edition of these writings dates, for the first,
from 1864 (Theory of Legislation, translation from the French by R. Hildreth, London:
Kegan Paul), and for the second, from 1825 (The Rationale of Reward, translation from the
French by R. Smith, London: J. & A. Hunt) and 1830 (The Rationale of Punishment, trans-
lation from the French by R. Smith, London: R. Heward).
See Patrick Colquhoun, A Treatise on the Police of the Metropolis (London: C. Dilly, 5th
ed., 1797).
See Surveiller et Punir; Discipline and Punish.
On these different points, see “La vérité et les formes juridiques” (1974), Dits et Écrits, 2,
pp. 589–590; English translation by Robert Hurley, “Truth and Juridical Forms” in
Essential Works of Foucault, 3, pp. 70–71.
See above, this lecture, note 18.
This phrase is not found in Becker’s article. Foucault relies on the synthesis of Becker’s and
Stigler’s works provided by Jenny, “La théorie économique du crime ... ” p. 298: “Rejecting,
here as in the other domains of economic theory, any moral judgment, the economist dis-
tinguishes criminal activities from lawful activities solely on the basis of the type of risk
incurred. Criminal activities are those that make the individual engaged in them incur a
particular type of risk: that of being caught and condemned to a penalty (amends,
imprisonment, execution).”
The first article of the 1810 Penal Code, which remained in force in its essential provisions
until 1994, based the division of infractions—contraventions, misdemeanors, and264
27.
28.
29.
30.
31.
32.
33.
34.
35.
t h e b i rt h o f b i o p o l i t i c s
crimes—on the nature of the penalty decreed. It reserved the qualification of “crime” for
“the infraction that the laws punish by a physical penalty involving loss of civil rights.”
On this concept, first introduced in 1920 by Pigou in his Economics of Welfare, see
P. Rosanvallon, La Crise de l’État-providence, pp. 59–60. See also, Y. Simon, “Le marché
et l’allocation des ressources,” in J.-J. Rosa and F. Aftalion, L’Économique retrouvée, p. 268:
“Externalities are monetary or non-monetary costs and benefits arising from phenomena
of social interdependence. ( ... ) For the theorists of welfare economics ( ... ), externalities
reflect the failure of the market in the process of the allocation of resources and require
public intervention to reduce the divergence between social and private costs.”
See F. Jenny, “La théorie économique du crime ... ” p. 298: “If crime enables the individual
who commits it to maximize his own utility, it nevertheless generates negative externalities
at the level of the community. The overall level of this activity or of this industry must
therefore be limited. One way of limiting the negative externalities resulting from crimes is
to arrest the criminals and inflict penalties on them ( ... ).”
Foucault is referring here to the theory of speech acts developed in the framework of
Wittgenstein’s pragmatic linguistics by J.L. Austin in How To Do Things with Words
(London: Oxford University Press, 1962), P.F. Strawson, “Intention and convention in
speech-acts” in Logico-Linguistic Papers (London: Methuen, 1971), and J.R. Searle, Speech
Acts: An essay in the philosophy of language (London: Cambridge University Press, 1969).
The French translation of the latter, Les Actes de langage. Essai de philosophie du langage
(Paris: Hermann, 1972) contains an important preface by O. Ducrot, “De Saussure à la
philosophie du langage.” These four authors are briefly referred to by Foucault in a round
table discussion in Rio de Janeiro in 1973 concerning “the analysis of discourse as strategy”
following the lectures “La vérité et les formes juridiques” Dits et Écrits, 2, p. 631. [The dis-
cussion is omitted from the English translation of these lectures; G.B.] See also, on the
notion of speech acts, L’Archéologie du savoir (Paris: Gallimard, 1969) pp. 110–111; English
translation by A. Sheridan, The Archeology of Knowledge (London: Tavistock, and New York:
Pantheon, 1972) pp. 83–84, and Foucault’s answer to Searle, with whom he was in corre-
spondence some weeks after these lectures: “As to the analysis of speech acts, I am in com-
plete agreement with your remarks. I was wrong in saying that statements were not speech
acts, but in doing so I wanted to underline the fact that I see them under a different angle
than yours” (letter to Searle of 15 May 1979) quoted by H. Dreyfus and P. Rabinow, Michel
Foucault: Beyond Structuralism and Hermeneutics (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1982)
p. 46, note 1.
G.J. Stigler, “The optimum enforcement of laws,” p. 40: “The goal of enforcement, let us
assume, is to achieve that degree of compliance with the rule of prescribed (or proscribed)
behavior that the society believes it can afford. There is one decisive reason why the society
must forego ‘complete’ enforcement of the rule: enforcement is costly.”
G. Becker, “Crime and punishment,” p. 40: “( ... ) how many offenses should be permit-
ted, and how many offenders should go unpunished?”
I. Ehrlich, “The deterrent effect of capital punishment” p. 40: “In view of the new evidence
presented here, one cannot reject the hypothesis that law enforcement activities in general
and executions in particular do exert a deterrent effect on acts of murder. Strong inferences
to the contrary drawn from earlier investigations appear to have been premature.” Ehrlich
is aiming especially at the arguments developed by T. Sellin against the death penalty in his
book The Death Penalty: A report for the model penal code project of the American Law Institute
(Philadelphia: Executive Office, American Law Institute, 1959).
On the drugs question, see F. Jenny, “La théorie économique du crime” pp. 315–316.
B.J. Eatherly, “Drug-law enforcement: should we arrest pushers or users?” Journal of
Political Economy, vol. 82 (1), 1974, pp. 210–214; M. Moore, “Policies to achieve discrimina-
tion on the effective price of heroin,” American Economic Review, vol. 63 (2), May 1973,
pp. 270–278. Foucault relies here on the synthesis of these articles given by F. Jenny, p. 316.
I. Ehrlich, “The deterrent effect of capital punishment” p. 399: “The abhorrent, cruel and
occasionally pathological nature of murder notwithstanding, available evidence is at least
not inconsistent with these basic propositions [1) that [murder and other crimes against
the person] are committed largely as a result of hate, jealousy, and other interpersonal con-
flicts involving pecuniary and non pecuniary motives or as a by-product of crimes against21 March 1979
265
property; and 2) that the propensity to perpetrate such crimes is influenced by the
prospective gains and losses associated with their commissions] ( ... ) There is no reason a
priori to expect that persons who hate or love others are less responsive to changes in costs
and gains associated with activities they may wish to pursue than persons indifferent
toward the well-being of others.”
36. Foucault does not return to this point in the subsequent lectures.
37. Here again, the following lecture will not keep this promise.This page intentionally left blankeleven
28 March 1979
The model of homo œconomicus. ⵑ Its generalization to
every form of behavior in American neo-liberalism. ⵑ Economic
analysis and behavioral techniques. ⵑ Homo œconomicus as
the basic element of the new governmental reason appeared in the
eighteenth century. ⵑ Elements for a history of the notion of homo
œconomicus before Walras and Pareto. ⵑ The subject of interest
in English empiricist philosophy (Hume). ⵑ The heterogeneity of
the subject of interest and the legal subject: (1) The irreducible
nature of interest in comparison with juridical will. (2) The
contrasting logics of the market and the contract. ⵑ Second
innovation with regard to the juridical model: the economic subject’s
relationship with political power. Condorcet. Adam Smith’s
“invisible hand”: invisibility of the link between the individual’s
pursuit of profit and the growth of collective wealth. The non-
totalizable nature of the economic world. The sovereign’s necessary
ignorance. ⵑ Political economy as critique of governmental reason:
rejection of the possibility of an economic sovereign in its two,
mercantilist and physiocratic, forms. ⵑ Political economy as a
science lateral to the art of government.
[ ]
TODAY I WOULD LIKE to start from the things I have been explaining
over the last weeks and go back a bit toward what I took as my starting
point at the beginning of the year. Last week I tried to show how
American neo-liberals apply, or at any rate try to apply economic analysis268
t h e b i rt h o f b i o p o l i t i c s
to a series of objects, to domains of behavior or conduct which were not
market forms of behavior or conduct: they attempt to apply economic
analysis to marriage, the education of children, and criminality, for
example. This of course poses a problem of both theory and method, the
problem of the legitimacy of applying such an economic model, the
practical problem of the heuristic value of this model, etcetera. These
problems all revolve around a theme or a notion: homo œconomicus, eco-
nomic man. To what extent is it legitimate, and to what extent is it
fruitful, to apply the grid, the schema, and the model of homo œconomicus
to not only every economic actor, but to every social actor in general
inasmuch as he or she gets married, for example, or commits a crime, or
raises children, gives affection and spends time with the kids? So there
is a problem of the validity of the applicability of this grid of homo
œconomicus. Actually, this problem of the application of homo œconomicus
has become one of the classics of neo-liberal discussion in the United
States. The background* of this analysis, well, the first text, is the book
by von Mises, Human Action, 1 and you will also find in the years
1960–1970, and especially in 1962, 2 a series of articles in the Journal of
Political Economy: articles by Becker, 3 Kirzner, 4 and others.
This problem of homo œconomicus and its applicability seems to me to
be interesting because I think there are important stakes in the generaliza-
tion of the grid of homo œconomicus to domains that are not immediately
and directly economic. The most important stake is no doubt the prob-
lem of the identification of the object of economic analysis with any con-
duct whatsoever entailing an optimal allocation of scarce resources to
alternative ends, which is the most general definition of the object of
economic analysis as defined, roughly, by the neo-classical school. 5 But
behind this identification of the object of economic analysis with con-
ducts involving an optimal allocation of scarce resources to alternative
ends we find the possibility of a generalization of the economic object to
any conduct which employs limited means to one end among others.
And we reach the point at which maybe the object of economic analysis
should be identified with any purposeful conduct which involves,
* In English in the lecture; G.B.28 March 1979
269
broadly speaking, a strategic choice of means, ways, and instruments: in
short, the identification of the object of economic analysis with any
rational conduct. In the end, is not economics the analysis of forms of
rational conduct and does not all rational conduct, whatever it may be,
fall under something like economic analysis? Is not a rational conduct,
like that which consists in formal reasoning, an economic conduct in the
sense we have just defined, that is to say, the optimal allocation of scarce
resources to alternative ends, since formal reasoning consists in deploy-
ing certain scarce resources—a symbolic system, a set of axioms, rules of
construction, and not just any symbolic system or any rules of construc-
tion, but just some—to be used to optimal effect for a determinate and
alternative end, in this case a true rather than a false conclusion which
we try to reach by the best possible allocation of scarce resources? So, if
it comes to it, we do not see why we would not define any rational con-
duct or behavior whatsoever as the possible object of economic analysis.
In truth, this already extremely extensive definition is not even the
only one, and Becker, for example—the most radical of the American neo-
liberals, if you like—says that it is still not sufficient, that the object of eco-
nomic analysis can be extended even beyond rational conduct as defined
and understood in the way I have just described, and that economic laws
and economic analysis can perfectly well be applied to non-rational con-
duct, that is to say, to conduct which does not seek at all, or, at any rate,
not only to optimize the allocation of scarce resources to a determinate
end. 6 Becker says: Basically, economic analysis can perfectly well find its
points of anchorage and effectiveness if an individual’s conduct answers to
the single clause that the conduct in question reacts to reality in a non-
random way. That is to say, any conduct which responds systematically to
modifications in the variables of the environment, in other words, any
conduct, as Becker says, which “accepts reality,” must be susceptible to
economic analysis. 7 Homo œconomicus is someone who accepts reality.
Rational conduct is any conduct which is sensitive to modifications in the
variables of the environment and which responds to this in a non-random
way, in a systematic way, and economics can therefore be defined as the sci-
ence of the systematic nature of responses to environmental variables.
This is a colossal definition, which obviously economists are far from
endorsing, but it has a certain interest. It has a practical interest, if you270
t h e b i rt h o f b i o p o l i t i c s
like, inasmuch as if you define the object of economic analysis as the set
of systematic responses to the variables of the environment, then you
can see the possibility of integrating within economics a set of tech-
niques, those called behavioral techniques, which are currently in fash-
ion in the United States. You find these methods in their purest, most
rigorous, strictest or aberrant forms, as you wish, in Skinner, 8 and pre-
cisely they do not consist in analyzing the meaning of different kinds of
conduct, but simply in seeing how, through mechanisms of reinforce-
ment, a given play of stimuli entail responses whose systematic nature
can be observed and on the basis of which other variables of behavior
can be introduced. In fact, all these behavioral techniques show how
psychology understood in these terms can enter the definition of eco-
nomics given by Becker. There is little literature on these behavioral
techniques in France. In Castel’s last book, The Psychiatric Society, there is
a chapter on behavioral techniques and you will see how this is precisely
the implementation, within a given situation—in this case, a hospital, a
psychiatric clinic—of methods which are both experimental and involve
a specifically economic analysis of behavior. 9
Today though, I would like to emphasize a different aspect. This is
that Becker’s definition, which, again, although it is not recognized by
the average economist, or even by the majority of them, nonetheless,
despite its isolated character, enables us to highlight a paradox, because
homo œconomicus as he appears in the eighteenth century—I will come
back to this shortly—basically functions as what could be called an
intangible element with regard to the exercise of power. Homo œconomicus
is someone who pursues his own interest, and whose interest is such that
it converges spontaneously with the interest of others. From the point of
view of a theory of government, homo œconomicus is the person who must
be let alone. With regard to homo œconomicus, one must laisser-faire; he is
the subject or object of laissez -faire. And now, in Becker’s definition
which I have just given, homo œconomicus, that is to say, the person who
accepts reality or who responds systematically to modifications in the
variables of the environment, appears precisely as someone manageable,
someone who responds systematically to systematic modifications artifi-
cially introduced into the environment. Homo œconomicus is someone who
is eminently governable. From being the intangible partner of laissez -faire,28 March 1979
271
homo œconomicus now becomes the correlate of a governmentality which
will act on the environment and systematically modify its variables.
I think this paradox enables us to pinpoint the problem I would like
to say something about, which is precisely this: since the eighteenth
century, has homo œconomicus involved setting up an essentially and
unconditionally irreducible element against any possible government?
Does the definition of homo œconomicus involve marking out the zone that
is definitively inaccessible to any government action? Is homo œconomicus
an atom of freedom in the face of all the conditions, undertakings, legis-
lation, and prohibitions of a possible government, or was he not already
a certain type of subject who precisely enabled an art of government to
be determined according to the principle of economy, both in the sense
of political economy and in the sense of the restriction, self-limitation,
and frugality of government? Obviously, the way in which I have formu-
lated this question gives the answer straightaway, but this is what I
would like to talk about, that is to say, homo œconomicus as the partner,
the vis-à-vis, and the basic element of the new governmental reason for-
mulated in the eighteenth century.
In actual fact, to tell the truth there is no theory of homo œconomicus,
or even a history of his notion. 10 You practically have to wait for what
are called the neo-classical economists, Walras 11 and Pareto, 12 to see the
more or less clear emergence of what is understood by homo œconomicus.
But this notion was in fact employed even before Walras and Pareto,
although it was not conceptualized very rigorously. How can we consider
this problem of homo œconomicus and its appearance? To simplify things,
and somewhat arbitrarily, I will start, as from a given, with English
empiricism and the theory of the subject which is in fact put to work in
English empiricist philosophy, with the view that—once again, I am
making a somewhat arbitrary division—the theory of the subject in
English empiricism probably represents one of the most important
mutations, one of the most important theoretical transformations in
Western thought since the Middle Ages.
What English empiricism introduces—let’s say, roughly, with
Locke 13 —and doubtless for the first time in Western philosophy, is a sub-
ject who is not so much defined by his freedom, or by the opposition of
soul and body, or by the presence of a source or core of concupiscence272
t h e b i rt h o f b i o p o l i t i c s
marked to a greater or lesser degree by the Fall or sin, but who appears in
the form of a subject of individual choices which are both irreducible and
non-transferable. What do I mean by irreducible? I will take Hume’s
very simple and frequently cited passage, 14 which says: What type of ques-
tion is it, and what irreducible element can you arrive at when you ana-
lyze an individual’s choices and ask why he did one thing rather than
another? Well, he says: “You ask someone, ‘Why do you exercise?’ He will
reply, ‘I exercise because I desire health.’ You go on to ask him, ‘Why do
you desire health?’ He will reply, ‘Because I prefer health to illness.’
Then you go on to ask him, ‘Why do you prefer health to illness?’ He will
reply, ‘Because illness is painful and so I don’t want to fall ill.’ And if you
ask him why is illness painful, then at that point he will have the right
not to answer, because the question has no meaning.” The painful or
non-painful nature of the thing is in itself a reason for the choice beyond
which you cannot go. The choice between painful and non-painful is a
sort of irreducible that does not refer to any judgment, reasoning, or cal-
culation. It is a sort of regressive end point in the analysis.
Second, this type of choice is non-transferable. I do not mean that it
is non-transferable in the sense that one choice could not be replaced by
another. You could perfectly well say that if you prefer health to illness,
you may also prefer illness to health, and then choose illness. It is also
clear that you may perfectly well say: I prefer to be ill and that someone
else is not. But, in any case, on what basis will this substitution of one
choice for another be made? It will be made on the basis of my own
preference and on the basis of the fact that I would find someone else
being ill more painful, for example, than being ill myself. In the end the
principle of my choice really will be my own feeling of painful or not-
painful, of pain and pleasure. There is Hume’s famous aphorism which
says: If I am given the choice between cutting my little finger and the
death of someone else, even if I am forced to cut my little finger, nothing
can force me to think that cutting my little finger is preferable to the
death of someone else. 15
So, these are irreducible choices which are non-transferable in rela-
tion to the subject. This principle of an irreducible, non-transferable,
atomistic individual choice which is unconditionally referred to the
subject himself is what is called interest.28 March 1979
273
What I think is fundamental in English empiricist philosophy—
which I am treating completely superficially—is that it reveals some-
thing which absolutely did not exist before. This is the idea of a subject
of interest, by which I mean a subject as the source of interest, the start-
ing point of an interest, or the site of a mechanism of interests. For sure,
there is a series of discussions on the mechanism of interest itself and
what may activate it: is it self-preservation, is it the body or the soul, or
is it sympathy? But this is not what is important. What is important is
the appearance of interest for the first time as a form of both immedi-
ately and absolutely subjective will.
I think the problem and that which gets the problematic of homo
œconomicus underway is whether this subject of interest or form of will
called interest can be considered as the same type of will as the juridical
will or as capable of being connected to the juridical will. At first sight,
we can say although interest and the juridical will cannot be completely
assimilated to each other, they may perfectly well be reconciled. And in
fact this is what we see from the end of the seventeenth century up to the
middle of the eighteenth century and a jurist like Blackstone: 16 a kind of
mixture of juridical analysis and analysis in terms of interest. For exam-
ple, when Blackstone addresses the problem of the original contract, of
the social contract, he says: Why have individuals entered into the con-
tract? Well, they have entered the contract because they have an interest.
Every individual has his interests, but in the state of nature and before
the contract, these interests are threatened. So, to protect at least some
of their interests they are forced to sacrifice others. The immediate will
be sacrificed for what is more important and possibly deferred. 17 In
short, interest appears here as an empirical source of the contract. And
the juridical will which is then formed, the legal subject who is consti-
tuted through the contract, is basically the subject of interest, but a
purified subject of interest who has become calculating, rationalized,
and so on. Now in relation to this, if you like, somewhat loose analysis,
in which juridical will and interest are mixed together and intertwined,
generating each other, Hume notes that it’s not like this and that things
are not so simple. Why, Hume says, do you enter the contract? Out of
interest. You enter the contract out of interest, because you realize that
if you were alone and had no ties with others your interests would be274
t h e b i rt h o f b i o p o l i t i c s
harmed. But once you have entered the contract, why do you respect it?
The jurists say, and Blackstone in particular said around this time: You
respect the contract because once individual subjects of interest have
recognized the interest in entering the contract, the obligation of the
contract constitutes a sort of transcendence in relation to which the sub-
ject finds himself, in a way, subjected and constrained, so that, having
become a subject of right, he will obey the contract. Hume replies to
this: But this won’t do at all, because in fact, if you obey a contract this
is not because it is a contract, because you are held by the obligation of
the contract, or, in other words, because you have suddenly become a
subject of right and ceased being a subject of interest. If you continue to
respect the contract it is simply because you hold to the following rea-
soning: “The commerce with our fellows from which we draw such great
advantages would have no security if we did not respect our engage-
ments.” 18 This means that it is not because we have contracted that we
respect the contract, but because it is in our interest that there is a con-
tract. That is to say, the appearance and the emergence of the contract
have not replaced a subject of interest with a subject of right. In a calcu-
lation of interest, the subject of interest has constituted a form, an ele-
ment in which he will continue to have a certain interest right to the
end. And if, moreover, the contract no longer offers an interest, nothing
can oblige me to continue to comply with it. 19 So, juridical will does not
take over from interest. The subject of right does not find a place for
itself in the subject of interest. The subject of interest remains, subsists,
and continues up to the time a juridical structure, a contract exists. For
as long as the law exists, the subject of interest also continues to exist.
The subject of interest constantly overflows the subject of right. He is
therefore irreducible to the subject of right. He is not absorbed by him.
He overflows him, surrounds him, and is the permanent condition of
him functioning. So, interest constitutes something irreducible in
relation to the juridical will. This is the first point.
Second, the subject of right and the subject of interest are not gov-
erned by the same logic. What characterizes the subject of right? Of
course, at the outset he has natural rights. But he becomes a subject of
right in a positive system only when he has agreed at least to the principle
of ceding these rights, of relinquishing them, when he has subscribed to28 March 1979
275
their limitation and has accepted the principle of the transfer. That is to
say, the subject of right is, by definition, a subject who accepts negativ-
ity, who agrees to a self-renunciation and splits himself, as it were, to be,
at one level, the possessor of a number of natural and immediate rights,
and, at another level, someone who agrees to the principle of relinquish-
ing them and who is thereby constituted as a different subject of right
superimposed on the first. The dialectic or mechanism of the subject of
right is characterized by the division of the subject, the existence of a
transcendence of the second subject in relation to the first, and a rela-
tionship of negativity, renunciation, and limitation between them, and
it is in this movement that law and the prohibition emerge.
On the other hand—and this is where the economists’ analysis links
up with this theme of the subject of interest and gives it a sort of empir-
ical content—the subject of interest is not at all governed by the same
mechanism. What the analysis of the market shows, for example, what
the physiocrats in France, the English economists, and even theorists
like Mandeville 20 reveal, is that fundamentally the subject of interest is
never called upon to relinquish his interest. Consider, for example, what
takes place with the grain market—you recall, we talked about this last
time 21 —when there is an abundant harvest in one country and dearth in
another. The legislation in most countries prohibited unlimited export
of wheat from the rich country to the country suffering from dearth so
as not to cause shortages in the country which had reserves. The econo-
mists’ [response] to this is: Absurdity! Let the mechanism of interests
operate, let the sellers rush their grain to the countries where there is
dearth, where grain is dear and sells easily, and you will see that the
more they pursue their own interests the better things will be and you
will have a general advantage which will be formed on the basis of the
maximization of the interest of each. Not only may each pursue their
own interest, they must pursue their own interest, and they must pur-
sue it through and through by pushing it to the utmost, and then, at
that point, you will find the elements on the basis of which not only will
the interest of others be preserved, but will thereby be increased. So,
with the subject of interest, as the economists make him function, there
is a mechanism which is completely different from the dialectic of the
subject of right, since it is an egoistic mechanism, a directly multiplying276
t h e b i rt h o f b i o p o l i t i c s
mechanism without any transcendence in which the will of each har-
monizes spontaneously and as it were involuntarily with the will and
interest of others. We could not be more distant from the dialectic
of renunciation, transcendence, and the voluntary bond of the juridical
theory of the contract. The market and the contract function in exactly
opposite ways and we have in fact two heterogeneous structures.
To summarize this, we could say that at first sight it seems that the
analysis of interest in the eighteenth century can be linked to the theory
of the contract without too much difficulty, but when it is examined
more closely it in fact gives rise to what I think is a completely new,
heterogeneous problematic in relation to the typical elements of the
doctrine of the contract and the subject of right.* At the point of inter-
section, as it were, of the empirical conception of the subject of interest
and the analyses of the economists, a subject can be defined who is a
subject of interest and whose action has a multiplying and beneficial
value through the intensification of interest, and it is this that charac-
terizes homo œconomicus. In the eighteenth century the figure of homo
œconomicus and the figure of what we could call homo juridicus or homo
legalis are absolutely heterogeneous and cannot be superimposed on each
other.
Given this heterogeneity, I think we need to go further and say first
of all that not only are the economic subject and the subject of right for-
mally heterogeneous for the reasons I have just given, but it seems to me
that, partly as a consequence of this, the economic subject and the sub-
ject of right have an essentially different relationship with political
power. Or, if you like, with regard to the question of the foundation and
exercise of power, the question posed by the problematic of economic
man is completely different from that which could be posed by the figure
and element of juridical man, the legal subject. To understand what is rad-
ically new in economic man from the point of view of the problem of power
and of the legitimate exercise of power, I would like to start by quoting a
text from Condorcet, which seems to me to be rather illuminating on this.
* The manuscript, p. 9, adds: “a) First by an empirical radicalism in the manner of Hume,
b) then by an analysis of the mechanisms of the market.”28 March 1979
277
It comes from Les Progrès de l’esprit humain, in the Ninth era. Condorcet
says: If we consider the interest of an individual apart from the general
system of a society—he does not mean an individual isolated from soci-
ety (that is to say, he does not consider an individual alone), he means:
take an individual in society, and consider his own, peculiar interest—
then this specifically individual interest of someone who finds himself
within the general system of not only one society, but of societies, has
two characteristics. The first is that it is an interest which is dependent
upon on an infinite number of things. The interest of the individual will
depend on accidents of nature about which he can do nothing and which
he cannot foresee. It depends on more or less distant political events. In
short, the individual’s enjoyment is linked to a course of the world that
outstrips him and eludes him in every respect. The second characteristic
is that, on the other hand, despite everything “in this apparent chaos,”
Condorcet says, “we see nonetheless, through a general law of the moral
world, the efforts each makes for himself serving the good of all.” 22 This
means, on the one hand, that each is dependent on an uncontrollable,
unspecified whole of the flow of things and the world. In a way, the most
distant event taking place on the other side of the world may affect my
interest, and there is nothing I can do about it. The will of each, the
interest of each, and the way in which this interest is or is not realized
are bound up with a mass of elements which elude individuals. At the
same time, this individual’s interest, without him knowing it, wishing
it, or being able to control it, is linked to a series of positive effects
which mean that everything which is to his advantage will turn out to
be to the advantage of others. So that economic man is situated in what
we could call an indefinite field of immanence which, on the one hand,
links him, in the form of dependence, to a series of accidents, and, on the
other, links him, in the form of production, to the advantage of others,
or which links his advantage to the production of the advantage of oth-
ers. The convergence of interests thus doubles and covers the indefinite
diversity of accidents.
The situation of homo œconomicus could therefore be described as
doubly involuntary, with regard to the accidents which happen to him and
with regard to the benefit he unintentionally produces for others. It is
also doubly indefinite since, on the one hand, the accidents upon which278
t h e b i rt h o f b i o p o l i t i c s
his interest depends belong to a domain which cannot be covered or
totalized and, on the other, the benefit he produces for others by pro-
ducing his own benefit is also indefinite and cannot be totalized. His sit-
uation is therefore doubly involuntary, indefinite, and non-totalizable,
but all these involuntary, indefinite, uncontrollable, and non-totalizable
features of his situation do not disqualify his interest or the calculation
he may make to maximize it. On the contrary, all these indefinite fea-
tures of his situation found, as it were, the specifically individual calcu-
lation that he makes; they give it consistency, effect, insert it in reality,
and connect it in the best possible way to the rest of the world. So, we
have a system in which homo œconomicus owes the positive nature of his
calculation precisely to everything which eludes his calculation. We
arrive here, of course, at the unavoidable text, Adam Smith’s famous
words in the second chapter of Book IV, the only place, as you know, in
The Wealth of Nations, where he speaks of this famous thing, and where
he says: “By preferring the support of domestick to that of foreign
industry, he intends only his own security; and by directing that indus-
try in such a manner as its produce may be of the greatest value, he
intends only his own gain, and he is in this, as in many other cases, led
by an invisible hand to promote an end which was no part of his inten-
tion.” 23 So we are at the heart of the problematic of the invisible hand,
which is the correlate of homo œconomicus if you like, or rather is that kind
of bizarre mechanism which makes homo œconomicus function as an
individual subject of interest within a totality which eludes him and
which nevertheless founds the rationality of his egoistic choices.
What is this invisible hand? Well, of course, it is usually said that the
invisible hand refers to a more or less well thought-out economic opti-
mism in Smith’s thought. It is also usually said that we should see the
invisible hand as the remains of a theological conception of the natural
order. Through the notion of the invisible hand, Smith would be some-
one who more or less implicitly fixed the empty, but nonetheless
secretly occupied place of a providential god who would occupy the eco-
nomic process a bit like Malebranche’s God occupies the entire world
down to the least gesture of every individual through the relay of an
intelligible extension of which He is the absolute master. 24 Smith’s
invisible hand would be something like Malebranche’s God, whose28 March 1979
279
intelligible extension would not be occupied by lines, surfaces, and
bodies, but by merchants, markets, ships, carriages, and roads. A conse-
quence of this would be the idea that there is an essential transparency
in this economic world and that if the totality of the process eludes each
economic man, there is however a point where the whole is completely
transparent to a sort of gaze of someone whose invisible hand, following
the logic of this gaze and what it sees, draws together the threads of all
these dispersed interests. Therefore, there is the requirement, if not a
postulate, of the total transparency of the economic world. Now if we
read the text a bit further on, what does Adam Smith say? He is speak-
ing of those people who, without really knowing why or how, pursue
their own interest and this ends up benefiting everyone. Each only
thinks of his own gain and, in the end, the whole of industry benefits.
People, he says, only think of their own gain and do not think about the
benefit of everyone. And he adds that it is not always the worse for soci-
ety that the end of benefiting all does not enter into merchants’ con-
cerns. 25 “I have never known much good done by those who affected to
trade for the publick good. It is an affectation, indeed, not very common
among merchants.” 26 We can say, roughly: Thank heaven people are only
concerned about their interests, thank heaven merchants are perfect ego-
ists and rarely concern themselves with the public good, because that’s
when things start to go wrong.
So, in other words, there are two, absolutely coupled elements. For
there to be certainty of collective benefit, for it to be certain that the
greatest good is attained for the greatest number of people, not only is it
possible, but it is absolutely necessary that each actor be blind with
regard to this totality. Everyone must be uncertain with regard to the
collective outcome if this positive collective outcome is really to be
expected. Being in the dark and the blindness of all the economic agents
are absolutely necessary. 27 The collective good must not be an objective.
It must not be an objective because it cannot be calculated, at least, not
within an economic strategy. Here we are at the heart of a principle of
invisibility. In other words, what is usually stressed in Smith’s famous
theory of the invisible hand is, if you like, the “hand,” that is to say, the
existence of something like providence which would tie together all the
dispersed threads. But I think the other element, invisibility, is at least280
t h e b i rt h o f b i o p o l i t i c s
as important. Invisibility is not just a fact arising from the imperfect
nature of human intelligence which prevents people from realizing that
there is a hand behind them which arranges or connects everything that
each individual does on their own account. Invisibility is absolutely
indispensable. It is an invisibility which means that no economic agent
should or can pursue the collective good.
But we must no doubt go further than economic agents; not only no
economic agent, but also no political agent. In other words, the world of
the economy must be and can only be obscure to the sovereign, and it is
so in two ways. We are already familiar with one of these and there’s no
point in stressing it too much, which is that since the economic mecha-
nism involves each pursuing his own interest, then each must be left
alone to do so. Political power is not to interfere with this dynamic nat-
urally inscribed in the heart of man. The government is thus prohibited
from obstructing individual interests. This is what Adam Smith says
when he writes: the common interest requires that each knows how to
interpret his own interest and is able to pursue it without obstruction. 28
In other words, power, government, must not obstruct the interplay of
individual interests. But it is necessary to go further. Not only must
government not obstruct the interests of each, but it is impossible for
the sovereign to have a point of view on the economic mechanism which
totalizes every element and enables them to be combined artificially or
voluntarily. The invisible hand which spontaneously combines interests
also prohibits any form of intervention and, even better, any form of
overarching gaze which would enable the economic process to be total-
ized. A text from Ferguson is very clear on this point. In his Essay on the
History of Civil Society, 29 he says: “the more [the individual] gains for
himself, the more he augments the wealth of his country ... When the
refined politician would lend an active hand, he only multiplies inter-
ruptions and grounds of complaint; when the merchant forgets his own
interest to lay plans for his country, the period of vision and chimera is
near.” 30 Ferguson takes the example of French and English settlements
in America, and analyzing the French and English mode of colonization,
he says: The French arrived with projects, administration, and their def-
inition of what would be best for their American colonies. They con-
structed “great projects” that were only ever “in idea” and the French28 March 1979
281
colonies in America collapsed. What did the English bring to colonize
America? Did they bring grand projects? Not at all. They arrived with
“limited views.” They had no other project than the immediate advan-
tage of each, or rather, each had in mind only the limited view of their
own project. As a result, industry was active and settlements flour-
ished. 31 Consequently, the economy, understood as a practice but also as
a type of government intervention, as a form of action of the state or sov-
ereign, can only be short-sighted, and if there were a sovereign who
claimed to be long-sighted, to have a global and totalizing gaze, he
would only ever see chimeras. In the middle of the eighteenth century,
political economy denounces the paralogism of political totalization of
the economic process.
That the sovereign is, can, and must be ignorant is what Adam Smith
says in chapter 9 of Book IV of The Wealth of Nations, clarifying perfectly
what he means by the invisible hand and what is important in the
adjective “invisible.” Smith says: “Every man, as long as he does not vio-
late the laws of justice, must be able to pursue his interest and bring his
capital where he pleases.” 32 So, the principle of laissez-faire: in any case,
every man must follow his own interest. And as a result, he says some-
what hypocritically—I am the one saying it is hypocritical—the sover-
eign can only find this to his advantage, since he “is completely
discharged of a duty, in the attempting to perform which he must always
be exposed to innumerable delusions ... the duty of superintending the
industry of private people, and of directing it towards the employments
most suitable to the interest of the society.” 33 I say this sentence is
“hypocritical” because it could also be taken to mean that if the
sovereign, one person surrounded by more or less loyal advisors, were to
undertake the infinite task of superintending the totality of the eco-
nomic process, there is no doubt that he would be deceived by disloyal
administrators and ministers. But Smith also means that it is not just
due to his ministers’ disloyalty or the complexity of an inevitably
uncontrollable administration that he would make mistakes. He would
make mistakes for an, as it were, essential and fundamental reason. He
could not fail to be mistaken, and what is more this is what the sentence
says when speaking of this task, this duty, of which the sovereign must
be relieved, that of superintending the totality of the economic process,282
t h e b i rt h o f b i o p o l i t i c s
“for the proper performance of which no human wisdom or knowledge
could ever by sufficient.” 34
Economic rationality is not only surrounded by, but founded on the
unknowability of the totality of the process. Homo œconomicus is the one
island of rationality possible within an economic process whose uncon-
trollable nature does not challenge, but instead founds the rationality of
the atomistic behavior of homo œconomicus. Thus the economic world is
naturally opaque and naturally non-totalizable. It is originally and
definitively constituted from a multiplicity of points of view which is all
the more irreducible as this same multiplicity assures their ultimate and
spontaneous convergence. Economics is an atheistic discipline; econom-
ics is a discipline without God; economics is a discipline without total-
ity; economics is a discipline that begins to demonstrate not only the
pointlessness, but also the impossibility of a sovereign point of view over
the totality of the state that he has to govern. Economics steals away from
the juridical form of the sovereign exercising sovereignty within a state
precisely that which is emerging as the essential element of a society’s
life, namely economic processes. Liberalism acquired its modern shape
precisely with the formulation of this essential incompatibility between
the non-totalizable multiplicity of economic subjects of interest and the
totalizing unity of the juridical sovereign.
The problematic of the economy is by no means the logical comple-
tion of the great problematic of sovereignty through which eighteenth
century juridical-political thought strove to show how, by starting from
individual subjects of natural right, one could arrive at the constitution
of a political unity defined by the existence of an individual or collective
sovereign who is the holder of part of the totality of these individual
rights and at the same time the principle of their limitation. The eco-
nomic problematic, the problematic of economic interest, is governed by
a completely different configuration, by a completely different logic,
type of reasoning, and rationality. In fact, from the eighteenth century
the political-juridical world and the economic world appear as hetero-
geneous and incompatible worlds. The idea of an economic-juridical
science is strictly impossible and what is more it has never in fact been
constituted. Homo œconomicus is someone who can say to the juridical
sovereign, to the sovereign possessor of rights and founder of positive28 March 1979
283
law on the basis of the natural right of individuals: You must not. But he
does not say: You must not, because I have rights and you must not
touch them. This is what the man of right, homo juridicus, says to the
sovereign: I have rights, I have entrusted some of them to you, the others
you must not touch, or: I have entrusted you with my rights for a par-
ticular end. Homo œconomicus does not say this. He also tells the sover-
eign: You must not. But why must he not? You must not because you
cannot. And you cannot in the sense that “you are powerless.” And why
are you powerless, why can’t you? You cannot because you do not know,
and you do not know because you cannot know.
I think this is an important moment when political economy is able
to present itself as a critique of governmental reason. I am using
“critique” here in the specific, philosophical sense of the term. 35 Kant
too, a little later moreover, had to tell man that he cannot know the
totality of the world. Well, some decades earlier, political economy had
told the sovereign: Not even you can know the totality of the economic
process. There is no sovereign in economics. There is no economic sover-
eign. This is a very important point in the history of economic thought,
certainly, but also and above all in the history of governmental reason.
The absence or impossibility of an economic sovereign is a problem
which will ultimately be raised throughout Europe, and throughout the
modern world, by governmental practices, economic problems, social-
ism, planning, and welfare economics. All the returns and revivals of
nineteenth and twentieth century liberal and neo-liberal thought are
still a way of posing the problem of the impossibility of the existence of
an economic sovereign. And with the appearance of planning, the state-
controlled economy, socialism, and state socialism the problem will be
whether we may not overcome in some way this curse against the eco-
nomic sovereign which was formulated by political economy at its foun-
dation and which is also the very condition of existence of political
economy: In spite of everything, may there not be a point through which
we can define an economic sovereignty?
On a more limited scale, it seems to me that the basic function or role
of the theory of the invisible hand is to disqualify the political sovereign.
If we situate it in its immediate context, and not in the history of liberal-
ism over the last two centuries, it is very clear that this theory, understood284
t h e b i rt h o f b i o p o l i t i c s
as the disqualification of the very possibility of an economic sovereign,
amounts to a challenge to the police state I talked about last year. 36 The
police state, or the state governed by raison d’État, with its mercantilist
policies, was, from the seventeenth century, the perfectly explicit effort
to constitute a sovereign who would no longer be a sovereign of right and
in terms of right, but who could also be an administrative sovereign, that
is to say, a sovereign who would, of course, be able to administer the sub-
jects over whom he exercises sovereignty, but also the possible economic
processes taking place between individuals, groups, and states. The
police state, the state which implements the both voluntarist and mer-
cantilist policy of sovereigns, or at any rate, of some seventeenth and
eighteenth century sovereigns, like the French sovereign, rests in fact on
the postulate that there must be an economic sovereign. Political econ-
omy is not just a refutation of mercantilist doctrines or practices. Adam
Smith’s political economy, economic liberalism, amounts to a disqualifi-
cation of this entire project and, even more radically, a disqualification
of a political reason indexed to the state and its sovereignty.
It is interesting to see even more precisely what the theory of the
invisible hand is opposed to. It is opposed, very precisely, to what the
physiocrats said almost at the same time or, at any rate, to what they
were saying some years earlier, because from this point of view the posi-
tion of the physiocrats is very interesting and very paradoxical. In
France, the physiocrats analyzed the market and market mechanisms in
precisely the terms I have talked about several times 37 and proved that
the government, the state, or the sovereign must absolutely not interfere
with the mechanism of interest which ensures that commodities go
where they most easily find buyers and the best price. Physiocracy was
therefore a strict critique of all the administrative rules and regulations
through which the sovereign’s power was exercised on the economy. But
the physiocrats straightaway added this: Economic agents must be left
free, but, first, we must take account of the fact that the entire territory
of a country is basically the sovereign’s property, or at any rate that the
sovereign is co-owner of all the land of the country and so is therefore
co-producer. This enabled them to justify taxation. So, in the physio-
crat’s conception, the sovereign, as co-owner of a country’s lands and
co-producer of its products, will correspond perfectly, as it were, in28 March 1979
285
principle and right as well as in fact, to all the production and all the
economic activity of a country.
Second, the physiocrats say that the existence of an Economic Table,
which enables the circuit of production and the formation of rent to be
followed very exactly, gives the sovereign the possibility of exact know-
ledge of everything taking place within his country, thus giving him the
power to control economic processes. That is to say, the Economic Table
will offer the sovereign a principle of analysis and a sort of principle of
transparency in relation to the whole of the economic process. So that if
the sovereign leaves economic agents free, it is because, thanks to the
Economic Table, he knows both what is taking place and how it should
be taking place. Thus, in the name of this total knowledge, he will be
able to accept freely and rationally, or rather, he will be forced by reason,
knowledge, and truth to accept the principle of the freedom of economic
agents. So that there will be a second perfect correspondence between
the sovereign’s knowledge and the freedom of individuals.
Finally, third, a good government—that is to say, the government of a
sovereign who, thanks to the Economic Table, knows exactly what is
taking place with regard to economic processes—will have to explain to
the different economic agents, to the different subjects, how and why
things are as they are and what they have to do to maximize their profit.
There will have to be an economic knowledge spread as widely and uni-
formly as possible among all these subjects, and this economic know-
ledge, whose principle is found in the Economic Table drawn up by the
physiocrats, will be common to economically well-educated subjects and
to the sovereign who will be able to recognize the fundamental laws of
the economy. So at the level of knowledge, at the level of the conscious-
ness of truth, there will be a third perfect correspondence between the
sovereign and the economic processes, or at least the economic agents.
You can see therefore that the principle of laissez-faire in the physiocrats,
the principle of the necessary freedom of economic agents can coincide
with the existence of a sovereign who is all the more despotic and unre-
strained by traditions, customs, rules, and fundamental laws as his only
law is that of évidence, of a well-formed, well-constructed knowledge
which he will share with the economic agents. It is here, and only here,
that we have in fact the idea of a mutual transparency of the economic286
t h e b i rt h o f b i o p o l i t i c s
and the political. It is here, and only here, that we can find the idea that
economic agents must be allowed their freedom and that a political sov-
ereignty will cover the totality of the economic process with a gaze in the
uniform light, as it were, of evidence.
Adam Smith’s invisible hand is the exact opposite of this. It is the
critique of this paradoxical idea of total economic freedom and absolute
despotism which the physiocrats tried to maintain in the theory of eco-
nomic evidence. The invisible hand posits instead, as a rule, that this is
not possible, that there cannot be a sovereign in the physiocratic sense,
and that there cannot be despotism in the physiocratic sense, because
there cannot be economic evidence. So you can see, from the start—if we
call Adam Smith’s theory and liberal theory the start of political
economy—economic science never claimed that it had to be the line of
conduct, the complete programming of what could be called governmen-
tal rationality. Political economy is indeed a science, a type of knowledge
(savoir), a mode of knowledge (connaissance) which those who govern
must take into account. But economic science cannot be the science of
government and economics cannot be the internal principle, law, rule of
conduct, or rationality of government. Economics is a science lateral to
the art of governing. One must govern with economics, one must govern
alongside economists, one must govern by listening to the economists,
but economics must not be and there is no question that it can be the
governmental rationality itself.
It seems to me that this is how we can comment on the theory of the
invisible hand in relation to the problem of governmental rationality or
of the art of governing. So, a problem arises: what will government be
concerned with if the economic process, and the whole of the economic
process, is not in principle its object? I think it is the theory of civil
society, which I will try to talk about next week.28 March 1979
287
1. Ludwig von Mises, Human Action: A treatise on economics.
2. See in particular Journal of Political Economy, vol. 70 (5), October 1962, 2nd part,
coordinated by T. Schultz, entirely devoted to the problem of the “investment in human
beings.”
3. G. Becker, “Investment in human capital: a theoretical analysis.”
4. I.M. Kirzner, “Rational action and economic theory,” Journal of Political Economy, vol. 70 (4),
August 1962, pp. 380–385.
5. See above, lecture of 14 March 1979, notes 23 and 25.
6. See G. Becker, “Irrational action and economic theory,” Journal of Political Economy, vol. 70 (1),
August 1962, pp. 153–168.
7. Ibid., p. 167: “Even irrational decision units must accept reality and could not, for example,
maintain a choice that was no longer within their opportunity set. And these sets are not
fixed or dominated by erratic variation, but are systematically changed by different
economic variables ( ... ).”
8. Burrhus Frederic Skinner (1904–1990), American psychologist and psycho-linguist, is
one of the main representatives of the behaviorist school. Harvard professor from 1947, he
published many books, amongst which, Science and Human Behavior (London: Collier-
Macmillan, 1953); Verbal Behavior (Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall, 1957); and
Beyond Freedom and Dignity (New York: A.A. Knopf, 1971). Hostile to the use of statistics,
he thought individual behavior should be studied, “which presupposes control of the
environment in which the subject is placed and the definition of informative measures of
response. ( ... ) When a subject moves in his environment, some of his behavior produces
detectable modifications in the latter (contingencies of reinforcement). The effective
response is a class of responses defined by the consequences it has for the subject and
emitted in a given situation without being causally dependent on a stimulus of the
situation. A rigorous control of the contingencies thus enables repeatable behavior to be
selected” Encyclopaedia Universalis, Thesaurus, 1975, vol. 20, p. 1797. The end sought is
therefore “selection of the relevant behavior by manipulation of programs of reinforce-
ment” ibid.
9. F. Castel, R. Castel and A. Lovell, La Société psychiatrique avancée: le modèle américain (Paris:
Grasset, 1979) ch. 4, pp. 138–139; English translation by Arthur Goldhammer, The
Psychiatric Society (New York: Columbia University Press) pp. 113–115, on behavior modifi-
cation, inspired by the principles of conditioning (Pavlov) and behaviorism (Thorndike,
Skinner) in the psychiatric milieu (see also ch. 8, pp. 299–302; English, pp. 265–266).
10. See now P. Demeulenaere’s book, Homo œconomicus. Enquête sur la constitution d’un paradigme
(Paris: PUF, 1996).
11. See above, lecture of 21 February 1979, note 12.
12. Vilfredo Pareto (1848–1923), Italian sociologist and economist, Walras’ successor at the
University of Lausanne. Manuel d’économie politique (1906), in Œuvres complètes, vol. VII
(Geneva: Droz, 1981) pp. 7–18; English translation by Ann S. Schwier, Manual of Political
Economy (London: Macmillan, 1972) pp. 12–14. See J. Freund, Pareto, la théorie de l’equilibre
(Paris: Seghers, 1974) pp. 26–27 (homo œconomicus according to Pareto), which Foucault
had read.
13. John Locke (1632–1704), the author of Essay concerning Human Understanding (London:
printed by E. Holt for T. Basset, 1690).
14. David Hume (1711–1776), An Enquiry Concerning the Principles of Morals (1751) in Enquiries
Concerning Human Understanding and Concerning the Principles of Morals, ed. L.A. Selby-Bigge
(Oxford: The Clarendon Press, 1975, 3rd edition), Appendix 1, “Concerning Moral
Sentiment” p. 293: “Ask a man why he uses exercise; he will answer, because he desires to keep
his health. If you then enquire, why he desires health, he will readily reply, because sickness is
painful. If you push your enquiries farther, and desire a reason why he hates pain, it is
impossible he can ever give any. This is an ultimate end, and is never referred to any other
object.”
15. See D. Hume, A Treatise of Human Nature (1739–40), ed. L.A. Selby-Bigge (Oxford:
Clarendon Press, 1978) Book III, Part III, section III, p. 416: “Where a passion is neither
founded on false supposition, nor chuses means insufficient for the end, the understanding288
16.
17.
18.
19.
20.
21.
22.
23.
24.
t h e b i rt h o f b i o p o l i t i c s
can neither justify nor condemn it. ’Tis not contrary to reason to prefer the destruction of
the whole world to the scratching of my finger.”
William Blackstone (1723–1780): conservative jurist and professor of Law at Oxford, where
Bentham was his student 1763–64 (who later appears, on the basis of his Fragment on
Goverment (1776) as the “anti-Blackstone” (Halévy)). The author of Commentaries on the
Laws of England (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1765–1769) in 4 volumes. See E. Halévy, La
Formation du radicalisme philosophique, vol. 1, 1995 ed., pp. 55–56; The Growth of Philosophic
Radicalism, pp. 35–36; Mohammed El Shakankiri, La Philosophie juridique de Jeremy Bentham
(Paris: LJDJ, 1970) pp. 223–237.
See Commentaries, vol. 1 (there is a good summary in M. El Shakankiri, pp. 236–238). On
the mixture of juridical and utilitarian principles in Blackstone’s justification of the
penalty, see E. Halévy, La Formation du radicalisme philosophique p. 101; The Growth of
Philosophic Radicalism, p. 58, who detects here a lack of coherence.
D. Hume, “Of the Original Contract” in Essays Moral, Political, and Literary, ed. Eugene
F. Miller (Indianapolis: LibertyClassics, 1987) p. 481: “We are bound to obey our sovereign,
it is said; because we have given a tacit promise to that purpose. But why are we bound to
observe our promise? It must here be asserted, that the commerce and intercourse of
mankind, which are of such mighty advantage, can have no security where men pay no
regard to their engagements.” See also A Treatise of Human Nature, Book III, Part II, section
VIII, “Of the source of allegiance.”
A Treatise of Human Nature, Book III, Part II, section IX, p. 553: “( ... ) if interest first pro-
duces obedience to government, the obligation to obedience must cease, whenever the
interest ceases, in any great degree, and in a considerable number of instances.”
Bernard Mandeville (1670–1733), author of the famous Fable of the Bees, or Private Vices,
Publick Benefits (1714) (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1924; reprinted Indianapolis:
LibertyClassics, 1988).
Foucault means “last year.” See Sécurité, Territoire, Population; Security, Territory, Population,
lectures of 18 January and 5 April 1978.
Condorcet (Jean-Antoine-Nicolas Caritat, marquis de, 1743–1794), Esquisse d’un tableau his-
torique des progrès de l’espirit humain (1793), Ninth era (Paris: Garnier-Flammarion, 1988)
p. 219: “How, in this astonishing variety of works and products, of needs and resources, in
this frightening complication of interests, which links the isolated individual’s subsistence
and well-being to the general system of societies, which makes him dependent on all the
accidents of nature and every political event, which, as it were, extends his capacity to expe-
rience enjoyment or privation to the entire globe, how, in this apparent chaos, do we see
nonetheless, through a general law of the moral world, the efforts each makes for himself
serving the well-being of all, and, despite the external clash of opposed interests, the com-
mon interest requires that each knows how to interpret his own interest and is able pursue
it without obstruction?” [See below, note 28; G.B.]
Adam Smith, An Inquiry into the Nature and Causes of the Wealth of Nations, eds.
R.H. Campbell and A.S. Skinner (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1976), Vol. I, Book IV,
ch. 2, p. 456.
Nicolas Malebranche (1638–1715), philosopher and theologian, member of the Oratorians.
Foucault is referring here to the “occasionalist” thesis, or theory of “occasional causes,”
defended by Malebranche in several of his works—De la Recherche de la vérité (1674), XV e
Éclaircissment, Œuvres, t. I (Paris: Gallimard, 1979) pp. 969–1014; Entretiens sur la méta-
physique et la religion (1688), VII, Œuvres, t. II (1992) pp. 777–800, etcetera—according to
which “only God is a real cause. What we call a natural cause is not at all a real and gen-
uine cause, but simply, if we insist on keeping the name, an occasional cause, which, as a
consequence of general laws, determines that God manifests his action, which alone is effec-
tive, in this way” (V. Delbos, “Malebrance et Maine de Biran,” Revue de métaphysique, 1916,
pp. 147–148). This omnipresent, but hidden God is the source of every movement and
active inclination: “God, who alone can act in us, is now hidden from our eyes; his opera-
tions are not perceptible, and although he produces and conserves every being, the mind
that so ardently seeks the cause of every thing has difficulty recognizing it, although it
encounters it at every moment” (De la Recherche de la vérité, XV e Éclaircissement, p. 969).
On the theological sources of Smith’s conception of the “invisible hand,” see J. Viner, The28 March 1979
25.
26.
27.
28.
29.
30.
31.
32.
33.
34.
35.
36.
37.
289
Role of Providence in Social Order (Philadelphia: Independence Square, 1972) ch. 3: “The
invisible hand and the economic order.”
A. Smith, An Inquiry into the Nature and Causes of the Wealth of Nations, p. 456: “Nor is it
always the worse for the society that it [the end, promotion of the publick interest] was no
part of it [the individual’s intention].”
Ibid. Smith adds: “and very few words need be employed in dissuading them from it.”
On this necessary “blindness,” see above, lecture of 21 February 1979, the analysis of the
Rule of law and the criticism of planning according to Hayek.
Adam Smith, An Inquiry into the Nature and Causes of the Wealth of Nations, p. 456: “By pur-
suing his own interest he frequently promotes that of the society more effectually than
when he really intends to promote it.” [The words Foucault attributes to Adam Smith here
are in fact from Condorcet’s Esquisse d’un tableau historique des progrès de l’espirit humain,
quoted above in note 22. But see too, Smith, p. 531: “But the law ought always to trust
people with the care of their own interest, as in their local situations they must generally
be able to judge better of it than their legislator can do” and p. 540: “The natural effort of
every individual to better his own condition ... is so powerful a principle, that it is alone,
and without any assistance, not only capable of carrying on the society to wealth and pros-
perity, but of surmounting a hundred impertinent obstructions with which the folly of
human laws too often incumbers its operations”; G.B.]
Adam Ferguson, An Essay on the History of Civil Society, ed. Duncan Forbes (Edinburgh:
Edinburgh University Press, 1966). Ferguson’s Essay was first published in Edinburgh in
1767. The French translation by M. Bergier, Essai sur l’histoire de la société civile, appeared in
the Librairie Mme Yves Desaint in 1783, although the text was printed five years previ-
ously. This translation, revised and corrected, was republished with an important intro-
duction by C. Gautier (Paris: PUF, 1992).
Adam Ferguson, An Essay on the History of Civil Society, p. 144. The sentence ends with these
words “and the solid basis of commerce withdrawn.”
Ibid. p. 144: “the event has shewn, that private interest is a better patron of commerce and
plenty, than the refinements of state. One nation lays the refined plan of a settlement on
the continent of North America, and trusts little to the conduct of traders and short-
sighted men; another leaves men to find their own position in a state of freedom, and to
think of themselves. The active industry and limited views of the one, made a thriving
settlement; the great projects of the other were still in idea.”
A. Smith, An Inquiry into the Nature and Causes of the Wealth of Nations, p. 687: “Every man,
as long as he does not violate the laws of justice, is left perfectly free to pursue his own
interest in his own way, and to bring both his industry and capital into competition with
those of any other man, or order of men.”
Ibid.
Ibid.
On the way in which Foucault interprets the Kantian critique at this time, see his lecture
the previous year, “Qu’est-ce que la critique?” delivered on 27 May 1978 at the Société
française de philosophie, Bulletin de la société française de philosophie, no. 2, April-June 1990,
pp. 38–39 (not included in Dits et Écrits).
See Sécurité, Territoire, Population; Security, Territory, Population, lectures of 29 March and
5 April 1978.
See above, lecture of 17 January 1979 and Sécurité, Territoire, Population; Security, Territory,
Population, lectures of 18 January and 5 April 1978.This page intentionally left blanktwelve
4 April 1979
[ ]
Elements for a history of the notion of homo œconomicus
(II). ⵑ Return to the problem of the limitation of sovereign power
by economic activity. ⵑ The emergence of a new field, the correlate
of the liberal art of government: civil society. ⵑ Homo
œconomicus and civil society: inseparable elements of liberal
governmental technology. ⵑ Analysis of the notion of “civil
society”: its evolution from Locke to Ferguson. Ferguson’s An
Essay on the History of Civil Society (1787). The four
essential characteristics of civil society according to Ferguson: (1) it
is an historical-natural constant; (2) it assures the spontaneous
synthesis of individuals. Paradox of the economic bond; (3) it is a
permanent matrix of political power; (4) it is the motor of history.
ⵑ Appearance of a new system of political thought. ⵑ Theoretical
consequences: (a) the question of the relations between state and
society. The German, English, and French problematics; (b) the
regulation of political power: from the wisdom of the prince to the
rational calculations of the governed. ⵑ General conclusion.
LAST WEEK I TOUCHED on the theme of homo œconomicus which has
permeated economic thought, and especially liberal thought, since
around the middle of the eighteenth century. I tried to show how homo
œconomicus was a sort of non-substitutable and irreducible atom of inter-
est. I tried to show that this atom of interest could not be superimposed292
t h e b i rt h o f b i o p o l i t i c s
on, was not identifiable with, and was not reducible to the essential
characteristics of the subject of right in juridical thought; that homo
œconomicus and the subject of right were therefore not superposable, and
finally that homo œconomicus and the subject of right are not integrated
into their respective domains according to the same dialectic, that is to
say, that the subject of right is integrated into the system of other sub-
jects of right by a dialectic of the renunciation of his own rights or their
transfer to someone else, while homo œconomicus is integrated into the sys-
tem of which he is a part, into the economic domain, not by a transfer,
subtraction, or dialectic of renunciation, but by a dialectic of sponta-
neous multiplication.
I also tried to show that this difference, this irreducibility of homo
œconomicus to the subject of right entails an important modification
with regard to the sovereign and the exercise of sovereign power. In fact,
the sovereign is not in the same position vis-à-vis homo œconomicus as he
is vis-à-vis the subject of right. The subject of right may well, at least in
some conceptions and analyses, appear as that which limits the exercise
of sovereign power. But homo œconomicus is not satisfied with limiting
the sovereign’s power; to a certain extent, he strips the sovereign of
power. Is power removed in the name of a right that the sovereign must
not touch? No, that’s not what’s involved. Homo œconomicus strips the
sovereign of power inasmuch as he reveals an essential, fundamental,
and major incapacity of the sovereign, that is to say, an inability to mas-
ter the totality of the economic field. The sovereign cannot fail to be
blind vis-à-vis the economic domain or field as a whole. The whole set
of economic process cannot fail to elude a would-be central, totalizing
bird’s-eye view. Let’s say that in the classical conception of the sover-
eign in the Middle Ages, and still in the seventeenth century, there was
something above the sovereign which was impenetrable, and this was
God’s intentions. A sovereign could be absolute and marked out as
God’s representative on Earth, but the designs of Providence still
eluded him and encompassed him in their destiny. Now, beneath the
sovereign, there is something which equally eludes him, and this is not
the designs of Providence or God’s laws but the labyrinths and com-
plexities of the economic field. To that extent I think the emergence of
the notion of homo œconomicus represents a sort of political challenge to4 April 1979
293
the traditional, juridical conception, whether absolutist or not, of the
sovereign.
So, in relation to this, and considering things very abstractly and
schematically, I think there were two possible solutions. We can say
that if economic practice or economic activity, if the set of processes of
production and exchange elude the sovereign, then, very well, we will
limit the sovereign’s sovereignty geographically, so to speak, and fix a
sort of frontier to the exercise of his power: the sovereign will be able
to intervene everywhere except in the market. The market will be, if
you like, a sort of free port or free space in the general space of sover-
eignty. This is the first possibility. The second possibility is the concrete
proposal supported by the physiocrats. It consists in saying that the
sovereign really must respect the market, but this does not mean that
there will be a sort of zone within his sovereignty in which he will not
be able to intervene or from which he is excluded. Rather, it means that
vis-à-vis the market the sovereign will have to exercise a completely
different power than the political power he has exercised hitherto.
Vis-à-vis the market and the economic process, the sovereign will not
be someone who, by some right, possesses an absolute decision-making
power. His relationship to the market will have to be like that of a
geometer to geometrical realities, that is to say, he will have to recognize
it: he will have to recognize it through an évidence which will put him
in a position of both passivity with regard to the intrinsic necessity of
the economic process and, at the same time, of supervision and, as it
were, checking, or rather of total and constant verification of this
process. In other words, in the physiocrats’ perspective the sovereign
will have to pass from political activity to theoretical passivity in rela-
tion to the economic process. He will become a sort of geometer of the
economic domain forming part of his field of sovereignty. The first solu-
tion, that of limiting the activity of the sovereign to everything not
pertaining to the market, consists in maintaining the same form of gov-
ernmental reason, the same form of raison d’État, by simply carrying out
a subtraction of the market object, or of the market or economic
domain. The second solution, that of the physiocrats, consists in main-
taining the full extent of the activity of governmentality, but funda-
mentally altering the very nature of this activity, since it changes its294
t h e b i rt h o f b i o p o l i t i c s
coefficient, its index, and from governmental activity it becomes theo-
retical passivity, or alternatively it becomes évidence.
In actual fact, neither of these solutions was able to be any more than
a theoretical and programmatic virtuality which was never really
applied in history. A complete [readjustment (rééquilibrage)],* a com-
plete reorganization of government reason was carried out on the basis
of this problem of the specificity of homo œconomicus and his irreducibil-
ity to the sphere of right. More precisely, let’s say that the problem
which is posed by the simultaneous and correlative appearance of the
problematic of the market, of the price mechanism, and of homo œconomicus
is this: the art of government must be exercised in a space of sover-
eignty—and it is the law of the state which says this—but the trouble,
misfortune, or problem is that this space turns out to be inhabited by
economic subjects. Now, if we take things literally and grasp the
irreducibility of the economic subject to the subject of right, then these
economic subjects require either the sovereign’s abstention, or the sub-
ordination of his rationality, his art of governing, to a scientific and spec-
ulative rationality. What can be done to ensure that the sovereign does
not surrender any of his domains of action and that he is not converted
into a geometer of the economy? Juridical theory is unable to take on
and resolve the question of how to govern in a space of sovereignty
inhabited by economic subjects, since precisely (as I tried to show last
week) the juridical theory of the subject of right, of natural rights, and
of the granting and delegation of rights does not fit together and cannot
be fitted together with the mechanical idea, the very designation and
characterization of homo œconomicus. Consequently, neither the market in
itself, in its specific mechanism, nor Quesnay’s scientific Table, nor the
juridical notion of the contract can define and delimit in what respects
and how the economic men inhabiting the field of sovereignty are
governable. † The governability or governmentability—forgive these bar-
baric terms—of these individuals, who inhabit the space of sovereignty
* M.F.: une rééquilibration
†
Foucault adds: I was going to say government ... , yes governable
Manuscript: “governmentable (gouvernementables).”4 April 1979
295
as subjects of right and, at the same time, as economic men, can only be
assured, and in reality it was only possible for it to be assured, by the
emergence of a new object, a new domain or field which is, as it were,
the correlate of the art of government being constructed at this time in
terms of this problem of the relation between the subject of right and
the economic subject. A new plane of reference is needed, and clearly
this new plane of reference will not be the set of subjects of right, or the
set of merchants, or economic subjects or actors. These individuals who
are still subjects of rights as well as being economic actors, but who are
not “governmentable”* as one or the other, are only governable insofar as
a new ensemble can be defined which will envelop them both as subjects
of right and as economic actors, but which will bring to light not just
the connection or combination of these two elements, but a series of
other elements in relation to which the subject of right and the eco-
nomic subject will be aspects, partial aspects, which can be integrated
insofar as they belong to a complex whole. And I think it is this new
ensemble that is characteristic of the liberal art of governing.
Let’s say again, that for governmentality to preserve its global charac-
ter over the whole space of sovereignty, for it not to be subject to a
scientific and economic reason which would entail the sovereign having
to be either a geometer of the economy or a functionary of economic
science, for the art of governing not to have to split into two branches of
an art of governing economically and an art of governing juridically, in
short, to preserve the unity and generality of the art of governing over
the whole sphere of sovereignty, and to keep the specificity and auton-
omy of the art of governing with respect to economic science, to answer
these three questions, the art of governing must be given a reference, a
domain or field of reference, a new reality on which it will be exercised,
and I think this new field of reference is civil society.
What is civil society? Well, all in all, I think the notion and analysis
of civil society, the set of objects or elements that are brought to light in
the framework of this notion of civil society, amount to an attempt to
answer the question I have just mentioned: how to govern, according to
* In inverted commas in the manuscript.296
t h e b i rt h o f b i o p o l i t i c s
the rules of right, a space of sovereignty which for good or ill is inhab-
ited by economic subjects? How can a reason, a rational principle be
found for limiting, other than by right or by the domination of
economic science, a governmental practice which must take responsibil-
ity for the heterogeneity of the economic and the juridical? Civil society
is not a philosophical idea therefore. Civil society is, I believe, a concept
of governmental technology, or rather, it is the correlate of a technology
of government the rational measure of which must be juridically pegged
to an economy understood as process of production and exchange. The
problem of civil society is the juridical structure (économie juridique) of a
governmentality pegged to the economic structure (économie économique).
And I think that civil society—which is very quickly called society, and
which at the end of the eighteenth century is called the nation—makes a
self-limitation possible for governmental practice and an art of govern-
ment, for reflection on this art of government and so for a governmental
technology; it makes possible a self-limitation which infringes neither
economic laws nor the principles of right, and which infringes neither
the requirement of governmental generality nor the need for an
omnipresence of government. An omnipresent government, a govern-
ment which nothing escapes, a government which conforms to the rules
of right, and a government which nevertheless respects the specificity of
the economy, will be a government that manages civil society, the nation,
society, the social.
Homo œconomicus and civil society are therefore two inseparable*
elements. Homo œconomicus is, if you like, the abstract, ideal, purely eco-
nomic point that inhabits the dense, full, and complex reality of civil
society. Or alternatively, civil society is the concrete ensemble within
which these ideal points, economic men, must be placed so that they can
be appropriately managed. So, homo œconomicus and civil society belong
to the same ensemble of the technology of liberal governmentality.
You know how often civil society has been invoked, and not just in
recent years. Since the nineteenth century, civil society has always been
referred to in philosophical discourse, and also in political discourse, as
* M.F.: indispensable4 April 1979
297
a reality which asserts itself, struggles, and rises up, which revolts
against and is outside government or the state, or the state apparatuses
or institutions. I think we should be very prudent regarding the degree
of reality we accord to this civil society. It is not an historical-natural
given which functions in some way as both the foundation of and source
of opposition to the state or political institutions. Civil society is not a
primary and immediate reality; it is something which forms part of
modern governmental technology. To say that it belongs to governmental
technology does not mean that it is purely and simply its product or
that it has no reality. Civil society is like madness and sexuality, what I
call transactional realities (réalités de transaction). That is to say, those
transactional and transitional figures that we call civil society, madness,
and so on, which, although they have not always existed are nonetheless
real, are born precisely from the interplay of relations of power and
everything which constantly eludes them, at the interface, so to speak, of
governors and governed. Civil society, therefore, is an element of trans-
actional reality in the history of governmental technologies, a transac-
tional reality which seems to me to be absolutely correlative to the form
of governmental technology we call liberalism, that is to say, a technol-
ogy of government whose objective is its own self-limitation insofar as it
is pegged to the specificity of economic processes.
A few words, now, on this civil society and what characterizes it. I
would like to try to show, at least in principle, because we are now com-
ing to the end of the lectures, how this notion of civil society may indeed
resolve the problems I have just tried to indicate. So, to start with, I will
make a deplorably banal remark about civil society, namely, that the
notion of civil society completely changed during the eighteenth
century. Practically until the start of the second half of the eighteenth
century, civil society designated something very different from what it
will subsequently designate. In Locke, for example, civil society is pre-
cisely a society characterized by a juridical-political structure. It is soci-
ety, the set of individuals who are linked to each other through a
juridical and political bond. In this sense, the notion of civil society is
absolutely indistinguishable from political society. In Locke’s Second
Treatise of Government, chapter 7 is entitled: “Of Political or Civil
Society.” 1 So, until then, civil society is always a society characterized by298
t h e b i rt h o f b i o p o l i t i c s
the existence of a juridical and political bond. It is from the second half
of the eighteenth century, precisely at the time when the questions of
political economy and of the governmentality of economic processes and
subjects are being addressed, that the notion of civil society will change,
if not totally, then at least in a significant way, and it will be thoroughly
reorganized.
Of course, the notion of civil society is presented from different
angles and in various forms throughout the second half of the eighteenth
century. To simplify matters, I will take the most fundamental, almost
statutory text regarding the characterization of civil society. This is
Ferguson’s famous text, translated into French in 1783 with the title
Essais sur l’histoire de la société civile, 2 and which is very close to Adam
Smith’s Wealth of Nations, the word “nation” in Smith, moreover, having
more or less the same meaning as civil society in Ferguson. 3 We have here
the political correlate, the correlate in terms of civil society, of what
Adam Smith studied in purely economic terms. Ferguson’s civil society
is actually the concrete, encompassing element within which the eco-
nomic men Smith tried to study operate. I would like to pick out three
or four essential characteristics of this civil society in Ferguson: first,
civil society understood as an historical-natural constant; second, civil
society as principle of spontaneous synthesis; third, civil society as per-
manent matrix of political power; and fourth, civil society as the motor
element of history.
First, civil society as an historical-natural constant. For Ferguson, in
fact, civil society is a given beyond which there is nothing to be found.
Nothing exists before civil society, says Ferguson, or if something exists,
it is absolutely inaccessible to us, so withdrawn in the depths of time, so
anterior, so to speak, to what gives man his humanity, that it is impos-
sible to know what really could have taken place before the existence of
civil society. Whether this non-society is described in terms of solitude
and isolation, as if there could have been men scattered in nature with-
out any union or means of communication, or whether it is described, as
in Hobbes, in the form of an endless war or of a war of all against all, in
any case, all this—solitude or war of all against all—should be located in
a sort of mythical background which is of no use in the analysis of the
phenomena which concern us. Human history has always existed “taken4 April 1979
299
in groups,” Ferguson says on page four of the first volume of his Essay on
the History of Civil Society. 4 On page six he says society is “as old as the
individual,” and it would be as idle to imagine men not speaking to each
other as it would be to imagine them without feet or hands. 5 Language,
communication, and so a certain constant relationship between men is
absolutely typical of the individual and society, because the individual
and society cannot exist without each other. In short, there was never a
moment, or anyway it is pointless trying to imagine a moment when we
passed from nature to history, or from non-society to society. The nature
of human nature is to be historical, because the nature of human nature
is to be social. There is no human nature which is separable from the
very fact of society. Ferguson evokes the kind of myth or methodological
utopia which was often taken up in the eighteenth century: Take a
group of children, he says, who have been left to bring themselves up
outside any other form of society. Imagine some children put in a desert
and left to fend for themselves from the youngest age, and to develop all
alone, without instruction or guidance. Well, what will we see if we
return five, ten, or fifteen years later, provided, of course, that they are
not dead? “We would see the members of this little society eating and
sleeping, herding together and playing, developing a language, dividing
and quarreling,” striking up friendships and forsaking their own self-
preservation for the sake of others. 6 So, the social bond develops spon-
taneously. There is no specific operation to establish or found it. There
is no need of the institution or self-institution of society. We are in soci-
ety anyway. The social bond has no pre-history. Saying that the social
bond has no pre-history means that it is both permanent and indis-
pensable. Permanent means that however far back we go in the history
of humanity, we will find not only society, of course, but nature. That is
to say, there is no need to look somewhere else for the state of nature
sought by philosophers in the reality or myth of the savage, we can find
it right here. We will find the state of nature in France as well as at the
Cape of Good Hope, since the state of nature requires man to live in the
social state. 7 Society studied even in its most complex and developed
forms, society with the greatest state of consistency will always tell us
what the state of nature is, since the state of nature requires us to live in
society. So, the state of nature is permanent in the state of society, and300
t h e b i rt h o f b i o p o l i t i c s
the state of society is also indispensable for the state of nature, that is to
say, the state of nature can never appear in the naked and simple state.
Ferguson says: “In the condition of the savage, as well as in that of the
citizen, are many proofs of human invention.” 8 And he adds this phrase
which is characteristic, not because it is a sort of point of origin, but
because it points towards the theoretical possibility of an anthropology:
“If the palace be unnatural, the cottage is so no less.” 9 That is to say, the
primitive cottage is not the natural and pre-social expression of some-
thing. We are not closer to nature with a primitive cottage than with a
palace. It is simply a different distribution, a different form of the nec-
essary intertwining of the social and the natural, since the social is part
of the natural and the natural is always conveyed by the social. So, we
have the principle that civil society is an historical-natural constant for
humanity.
Second, civil society assures the spontaneous synthesis of individuals.
This returns us to what I have just said: spontaneous synthesis means
there is no explicit contract, no voluntary union, no renunciation of
rights, and no delegation of natural rights to someone else; in short,
there is no constitution of sovereignty by a sort of pact of subjection. In
fact, if civil society actually carries out a synthesis, it will quite simply
be through a summation of individual satisfactions within the social
bond itself. “How,” Ferguson says, “can we conceive a happy public if its
members, considered apart, be unhappy?” 10 In other words, there is reci-
procity between the whole and its components. Basically, we cannot say,
we cannot imagine or conceive an individual to be happy if the whole to
which he belongs is not happy. Better, we cannot even assess exactly an
individual’s quality, value, and virtue, we cannot attribute a coefficient
of good or evil to the individual unless we think of it [the coefficient] in
the reciprocity, or at any rate unless we think of it on the basis of the
place he occupies, the role he performs, and the effects he produces
within the whole. Every element of civil society is assessed by the good
it will produce or bring about for the whole. We can say that a man is
good, that he is fine only insofar as he is right for the place he occupies
and, Ferguson says, “produces the effect it must produce.” 11 But
conversely, the value of the whole is not an absolute and is not to be
attributed to the whole and only the whole, but to each member of this4 April 1979
301
whole: “it is likewise true, that the happiness of individuals is the great
end of civil society.” 12
So you can see that we are not dealing with a mechanism or system of
the exchange of rights. We are dealing with a mechanism of immediate
multiplication that has in fact the same form as the immediate multi-
plication of profit in the purely economic mechanism of interests. The
form is the same, but not the elements and contents. And this is why
civil society can be both the support of the economic process and
economic bonds, while overflowing them and being irreducible to them.
For in civil society, that which joins men together is indeed a mechanism
analogous to that of interests, but they are not interests in the strict
sense, they are not economic interests. Civil society is much more than
the association of different economic subjects, although the form in
which this bond is established is such that economic subjects will be
able to find a place and economic egoism will be able to play its role
within it. In fact, what links individuals in civil society is not maximum
profit from exchange, it is a series of what could be called “disinterested
interests.” What will this be? Well, Ferguson says, what links individ-
uals to each other in civil society is instinct, sentiment, and sympathy, it
is the impulses of benevolence individuals feel for each other, but is also
the loathing of others, repugnance for the misfortune of individuals, but
possibly the pleasure taken in the misfortune of others with whom one
will break. 13 This, then, is the first difference between the bonds that
bring economic subjects together and those that bring together individ-
uals belonging to civil society: there is a distinct set of non-egoist inter-
ests, a distinct interplay of non-egoist, disinterested interests which is
much wider than egoism itself.
The second, equally important difference that we see emerging by
bringing in these elements I have just been talking about is that the
bond between economic subjects is, if you like, non-local. The analysis
of the market proves that the multiplication of profits will ultimately be
brought about through the spontaneous synthesis of egoisms over the
whole surface of the globe. There is no localization, no territoriality, no
particular grouping in the total space of the market. On the other hand,
in civil society the bonds of sympathy and benevolence between some
individuals are, as I was saying, the correlates of contrary bonds of302
t h e b i rt h o f b i o p o l i t i c s
repugnance and the absence of support for or benevolence towards
others. This means that civil society always appears as a limited ensem-
ble, as one particular ensemble among others. Civil society does not
coincide with humanity in general; it exists in the form of ensembles at
the same or different levels which bring individuals together in a
number of units. Civil society, Ferguson says, leads the individual to
enlist “on the side of one tribe or community.” 14 Civil society is not
humanitarian but communitarian. And in fact we see civil society
appear in the family, village, and corporation, and, of course, at higher
levels, reaching that of the nation in Adam Smith’s sense, [in the sense
given to it]* at more or less the same time in France. The nation is pre-
cisely one of the major forms, [but] only one of the possible forms, of
civil society.
Having said this, you can see that the bond of economic interest occu-
pies an ambiguous position in relation to these bonds of disinterested
interests which take the form of local units and different levels. † On the
one hand, you can see that the economic bond, the economic process
which brings economic subjects together, will be able to lodge itself in
this form of immediate multiplication which does not involve the
renunciation of rights. Formally, therefore, civil society serves as the
medium of the economic bond. But the economic bond plays a very
strange role within civil society, where it finds a place, since while it
brings individuals together through the spontaneous convergence of
interests, it is also a principle of dissociation at the same time. The eco-
nomic bond is a principle of dissociation with regard to the active bonds
of compassion, benevolence, love for one’s fellows, and sense of commu-
nity, inasmuch as it constantly tends to undo what the spontaneous
bond of civil society has joined together by picking out the egoist inter-
est of individuals, emphasizing it, and making it more incisive. In other
words, the economic bond arises within civil society, is only possible
through [civil society], and in a way strengthens it, but in another way
it undoes it. Thus, on page nineteen of the Essay on the History of Civil
* M.F.: as it is employed
†
Foucault adds: which (have the look?) of communitarian bonds [words difficult to hear]4 April 1979
303
Society, Ferguson says: The bond between individuals is never stronger
than when the individual has no direct interest; it is never stronger than
when it is a question of sacrificing oneself for a friend, for example, or
of staying with one’s tribe rather than seeking abundance and security
elsewhere. 15 It is very interesting that this corresponds exactly to how
economic rationality is defined. When the economic subject sees that he
can make a profit by buying wheat in Canada, for example, and selling
it in England, he will do so. He does it because it is to his advantage, and
furthermore it will benefit everyone. However, the bonds of civil society
mean that one prefers to stay in one’s community, even if one finds
abundance and security elsewhere. So, it is “in a commercial state where
men may be supposed to have experienced, in its full extent, the inter-
est which individuals have in the preservation of their country* ... that
man is sometimes found a detached and solitary being: he has found an
object which sets him in competition with his fellow-creatures.” 16
Consequently, the more we move towards an economic state, the more,
paradoxically, the constitutive bond of civil society is weakened and the
more the individual is isolated by the economic bond he has with every-
one and anyone. This is the second characteristic of civil society: a spon-
taneous synthesis within which the economic bond finds its place, but
which this same economic bond continually threatens.
The third characteristic of civil society is that it is a permanent
matrix of political power. How does power come to a civil society which
in a way plays the spontaneous role of the social contract, of the pactum
unionis? What is the equivalent of the jurists’ pactum subjectionis, the pact
of subjection, which obliges obedience to certain individuals? Well, just
as there is no need of a pactum unionis to join individuals together in civil
society, so for political power to emerge and function within civil society
there is no need of a pactum subjectionis, of the surrender of certain rights
and the acceptance of someone else’s sovereignty. There is a spontaneous
formation of power. How does this come about? It is brought about
* Foucault stops here, not managing to read what he has written (“ ... fine, listen, the text
roughly says this, as in Medieval manuscripts, the manuscript is a bit spoiled”), but the
quotation [from the French translation; G.B.] he gives is accurate, apart from a minor variation.304
t h e b i rt h o f b i o p o l i t i c s
quite simply by a de facto bond which links different concrete individ-
uals to each other. In fact, these differences between individuals are
expressed, of course, in the different roles they play in society and in the
different tasks they perform. These spontaneous differences immediately
give rise to divisions of labor in the collective decision-making processes
of the group: some give their views, others give orders; some reflect, oth-
ers obey. “Prior to any political institution whatever,” says Ferguson,
“men are qualified by a great diversity of talents, by a different tone of
the soul, and ardour of the passions, to act a variety of parts. Bring them
together, each will find his place. They censure or applaud in a body;
they consult and deliberate in more select parties; they take or give an
ascendant as individuals.” 17 That is to say, in civil society the group’s
decision appears to be the decision of the whole group, but when we
look more closely at how this takes place we see that the decisions were
taken, he says, in “more select parties.” As individuals, some have
assumed authority and others have allowed these to acquire authority
over them. Consequently, the fact of power precedes the right that
establishes, justifies, limits, or intensifies it; power already exists before
it is regulated, delegated, or legally established. “We follow a leader,
before we have settled the ground of his pretensions, or adjusted the
form of his election: and it is not till after mankind have committed
many errors in the capacities of magistrate and subject, that they think
of making government itself a subject of rules.” 18 The juridical structure
of power always comes after the event or fact of power itself.* So it can-
not be said that men were isolated, that they decided to constitute a
power, and then here they are living in a state of society. This was,
roughly, the analysis made in the seventeenth and at the start of the
eighteenth century. But neither can we say that men join together in
society and then [think]: Wouldn’t it be good, or convenient, or useful
to establish a power and regulate its modalities. In actual fact, civil soci-
ety permanently, and from the very start, secretes a power that is neither
* Foucault adds: In short, civil society secretes its own power that is neither its first condition
nor its supplement.
The sentence is repeated a bit below.4 April 1979
305
its condition nor supplement. “It is obvious,” Ferguson says, “that some
mode of subordination is as necessary to men as society itself.” 19 You
recall that Ferguson said that we cannot conceive of a man without soci-
ety. We cannot conceive of a man without language and communication,
no more than we can conceive of a man without hands and feet. Thus
man, his nature, his feet, his hands, his language, others, communica-
tion, society, and power all constitute an interdependent whole charac-
teristic of civil society.
The fourth characteristic of civil society is that it constitutes what
could be called—using a word from much later which to some extent is
now discredited but which it seems to me may find a first point of appli-
cation here—the motor of history. It is the motor of history precisely
because, if we take up the two elements I have been talking about—on
the one hand, civil society as spontaneous synthesis and spontaneous
subordination, and, [on the other], the existence of an element which
finds its place quite naturally within this spontaneous synthesis and
subordination but which is also the principle of dissociation, namely
interest, the egoism of homo œconomicus, the economic processes—then
[first of all], with the idea of civil society as spontaneous synthesis and
subordination we have the principle, or theme, or idea, or hypothesis
that we are dealing with a stable equilibrium. After all, since men are
spontaneously brought together by bonds of benevolence, and since they
form communities in which subordination is established by immediate
consent, then it should not change and consequently everything should
remain in place. And, in actual fact, there are a number of communities
which appear with this first aspect of, I would say, if you like, a functional
equilibrium of the whole. On page 86, describing North American sav-
ages, or reporting observations of North American savages, Ferguson
says: “Thus, without any settled form of government, or any explicit
bond of union, and by an effect in which instinct seems to have a greater
part than reason [the families of these North American savages] con-
ducted themselves with the intelligence, the concert, and the force of a
nation. Foreigners, without being able to discover who is the magistrate
( ... ) always find a council with whom they may treat ( ... ). Without
police or compulsory laws, their domestic society is conducted with
order.” 20 So, there is a spontaneous bond and spontaneous equilibrium.306
t h e b i rt h o f b i o p o l i t i c s
However, precisely inasmuch as within this spontaneous bond there
is another, equally spontaneous, but dissociative bond, then disequilib-
rium is introduced as a result, either spontaneously or by virtue of the
economic mechanism. Sometimes Ferguson refers to pure and simple
egoism: “He who first ranged himself under a leader,” he says, “did not
perceive, that he was setting the example of a permanent subordination,
under the pretence of which, the rapacious were to seize his possessions,
and the arrogant to lay claim to his service.” 21 So, there is a mechanism
of dissociation which is due simply to the egoism of power. But more
frequently and regularly Ferguson invokes actual economic interest and
the way in which economic egoism takes shape as the principle of disso-
ciation of the spontaneous equilibrium of civil society. This is how—and
here I refer you to those famous texts—Ferguson explains how civil soci-
eties regularly pass through three stages: savagery, barbarism, and civi-
lization. 22 How is savagery characterized? The characteristic feature of
savagery is precisely and above all a certain way of fulfilling or effectuat-
ing the interests of economic egoisms. What is savage society? It is a
society of hunting, fishing, and natural production, without agriculture
or cattle-rearing. It is therefore a society without property in which some
elements, the beginnings of subordination and government are found. 23
And then, with economic interests and egoisms coming into play, with
everyone wanting their own share, we move on to barbaric society. As a
result we have—I was going to say a new mode of production—we have
new economic-political institutions: herds belonging to individuals,
pastures belonging either to communities or to individuals. Private soci-
ety begins to be established, but a private society which is not yet guar-
anteed by laws, and at this point civil society takes on the form of
relations between patron and client, master and servant, family and
slave, and so on. 24 You can see that in this we have a specifically eco-
nomic mechanism which shows how, starting from civil society and
from the economic game which it harbors within itself, so to speak, we
move on to a whole series of historical transformations. The principle of
dissociative association is also a principle of historical transformation.
That which produces the unity of the social fabric is at the same time
that which produces the principle of historical transformation and the
constant rending of the social fabric.4 April 1979
307
In the theory of homo œconomicus which I talked about last week, you
[recall] how the collective interest arose from a necessarily blind inter-
play between different egoistical interests. Now you find the same kind
of schema of an effect of totality, of a global reality arising through the
blindness of each individual, but with regard to history. The history of
humanity in its overall effects, its continuity, and in its general and
recurrent forms—savage, barbarous, civilized, and so on—is nothing
other than the perfectly logical, decipherable, and identifiable form or
series of forms arising from blind initiatives, egoistic interests, and cal-
culations which individuals only ever see in terms of themselves. If you
multiply these calculations over time and get them to work, the econo-
mists say, the entire community will enjoy ever increasing benefits;
Ferguson, however, in the name of civil society, says there will be an
endless transformation of civil society. I do not mean that this is the
entry of civil society into history, since it is always in history, but that
this is the motor of history in civil society. It is egoistic interest, and con-
sequently the economic game which introduces the dimension through
which history is permanently present in civil society, the process through
which civil society is inevitably and necessarily involved in history.
“Mankind,” he says on page 122, “in following the present sense of their
minds, in striving to remove inconveniencies, or to gain apparent and
contiguous advantages, arrive at ends which even their imagination
could not anticipate, and pass on, like other animals, in the track of
their nature, without perceiving its end. ( ... ) Like the winds, that come
we know not whence, and blow withersoever they list, the forms of civil
society* are derived from an obscure and distant origin.” 25 In short, the
mechanisms which permanently constitute civil society are therefore the
same as those which permanently generate history in its general forms.
With this kind of analysis—which, once again, is only one example of
the many analyses of civil society in the second half of the eighteenth
century, or anyway, at the end of the eighteenth and the beginning of the
nineteenth century—we are, I think, at an important crossroads, since,
[first], we see a domain opening up of collective and political units
* The word “civil” is added by Foucault here; Ferguson has just “society.”308
t h e b i rt h o f b i o p o l i t i c s
constituted by social relations and bonds between individuals which go
beyond the purely economic bond, yet without being purely juridical:
civil society is characterized by bonds which are neither purely
economic nor purely juridical, which cannot be superimposed on the
structures of the contract and the game of rights conceded, delegated,
and alienated, and which, in their nature if not their form, are also dif-
ferent from the economic game. Second, civil society is the articulation
of history on the social bond. History is not the extension, like a pure
and simple logical development, of a juridical structure given at the
start. Nor is it a principle of degeneration producing negative phenom-
ena which obscure the original transparency of a state of nature or ori-
ginal situation. There is a never-ending generation of history without
degeneration, a generation which is not a juridical-logical sequence but
the endless formation of new social fabric, new social relations, new eco-
nomic structures, and consequently new types of government. Finally,
third, civil society makes it possible to designate and show an internal
and complex relationship between the social bond and relationships of
authority in the form of government. These three elements—the opening
up of a domain of non-juridical social relations, the articulation of his-
tory on the social bond, in a form which is not one of degeneration, and
government as an organic component of the social bond and the social
bond as an organic feature of the form of authority—are what distin-
guish the notion of civil society from (1) Hobbes, (2) Rousseau, and
(3) Montesquieu. It seems to me that we enter into a completely differ-
ent system of political thought and I think it is the thought or political
reflection internal to a new technology of government, or to a new prob-
lem which the emergence of the economic problem raises for techniques
and technologies of government.
I would like to move on now very quickly to conclude—or rather to
open up a series of problems. On the one hand, you can see that with
this notion of civil society we have a set of questions, problems, con-
cepts, and possible analyses which enable us to avoid the theoretical and
juridical problem of the original constitution of society. Certainly, this
does not mean that the juridical problem of the exercise of power within
civil society does not arise, but the way in which it is posed is reversed.
In the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries the problem was how to4 April 1979
309
find a juridical form at the origin of society, at the very root of society,
which would limit the exercise of power in advance. Here, rather, we are
dealing with an existing society with phenomena of subordination, and
so of power, and the problem is simply how to regulate and limit power
within a society in which subordination is already at work. It is in this
way that the question which has obsessed practically all political
thought from the end of the eighteenth century to the present arises,
that is to say, the question of the relations between civil society and the
state. Obviously, the problem could not be formulated in this way before
the second half of the eighteenth century and it appears in the following
way: With its juridical structure and institutional apparatus, what can
the state do and how can it function in relation to something, society,
which is already given?
I will just mention a series of possible solutions to this. 26 First the
state will appear as one of the dimensions and forms of civil society. This
is the theme developed by Jung-Stilling at the end of the eighteenth cen-
tury, saying that society has three axes, the family, the household or
estate, and then the state. 27 Then there will be the, let’s say, genetic and
historical analysis of Bensen, for example, which says that we should
conceive of civil society as having passed through three stages: family
society, civil society itself, and state society or society of state control. 28
And then there is the typological analysis you find in Schlözer, who says
that several types of society can be found. There is an absolutely univer-
sal type which is valid for all time and especially for all space and in
every part of the world, that is to say, there can be no society without
this familial society. And then, he says, presently there is a type of soci-
ety, civil society, which appears in all the forms of human gatherings
presently known to us. As for the state, it characterizes some forms of
civil society, those with which we are familiar today. 29 And, of course,
there is Hegel—about whom I will not speak—and the state as the self-
consciousness and ethical realization of civil society. 30
Fine, I don’t have time to dwell on all this. Let’s say, if you like, for a
whole range of easily imaginable reasons, civil society is analyzed in
Germany in terms of the opposition and relation between civil society
and the state. Civil society is only ever questioned in terms of its capac-
ity to support a state, or inasmuch as the state is either the contradictory310
t h e b i rt h o f b i o p o l i t i c s
element in relation to civil society, or instead the element which reveals
and finally realizes its truth. In England, and again for easily imaginable
reasons, the analysis of civil society is developed in terms of government
rather than in terms of the state, since the state has never been a prob-
lem for England. That is to say, the problem is whether there is need for
a supplementary government if it is true that civil society is already
there, that it ensures its own synthesis, and that it has a sort of internal
governmentality. Does civil society really need a government? This is the
famous question posed by Paine at the end of the eighteenth century and
which will haunt English politics at least until the twentieth century:
Could not society exist without government, or at any rate, without a
government other than the government it has created spontaneously and
without need of institutions which take charge of civil society, as it were,
and impose constraints which it does not accept? Paine’s question: We
should not, he says, confuse society and government. “Society is pro-
duced by our wants, and government by our wickedness ... The one
encourages intercourse, the other creates distinctions. The first is a
patron [in the English sense of the word, a protector; M.F.], the last a
punisher.” 31 In France the problem is not posed in either the English or
German terms.* The problem addressed in France is not that of “gov-
ernment in relation to civil society” or of “the state in relation to civil
society.” Here again, for well-known political and historical reasons, the
problem is posed differently. The problem is that of the Third Estate as
a political, theoretical, and historical problem up until the middle of the
nineteenth century: the idea of the bourgeoisie as the element which was
the vector and bearer of French history from the Middle Ages until the
* Foucault here diverges from the manuscript, pp. 20–21:
“In France, the problem was retranscribed in the debate on the need for a Declaration of the
Rights of Man.
Rights of Man: a complex notion that conveys both the juridical idea of a natural right that it is
the function of the political pact to guarantee [p. 21] and the idea of conditions that society
imposes on the state so as to enable it to exist and to recognize its legitimacy.
This practice of Rights of Man is referred to a conception of democracy. To which rather, accord-
ing to the English schema, liberals will oppose the idea that freedoms are what remain after one
has delimited government action, that they are not to be fixed as right ‘before the entrance into
politics,’ but to be obtained, preserved, and expanded by transactions, guarantees, an electoral
system, opinion, and so on.”4 April 1979
311
nineteenth century 32 is basically a way of posing the problem of civil
society, of government and power in relation to civil society. Whether it
is German philosophers, English political analysts, or French historians,
I think you always find the same problem of civil society as the major
problem of politics and political theory.
The other aspect, on which I will end this year’s lectures, is, of course,
that with this idea of civil society there is a redistribution, or a sort of
re-centering/de-centering of the governmental reason I tried to talk
about last year. Let’s look again at the general problem. It seems to me
that from the sixteenth century, and already in the Middle Ages more-
over, we see the appearance of the [following] question: How can the
exercise of power, that very singular practice which men cannot escape,
except in part and at times in particular processes and individual or col-
lective acts which pose a number of problems to jurists and historians,
be regulated and measured in the person who governs? Well, let’s say in
a very general, overall way that for a long time the idea of regulating,
measuring, and so limiting the indefinite exercise of power was sought
in the wisdom of the person who would govern. Wisdom was the old
answer. Wisdom means governing in accordance with the order of
things. It means governing according to the knowledge of human and
divine laws. It means governing according to God’s prescriptions. It
means governing according to what the general human and divine order
may prescribe. In other words, when one sought to identify how the sov-
ereign had to be wise and in what his wisdom consisted, one basically
tried to regulate and model government in terms of the truth. It was the
truth of religious texts, of revelation, and of the order of the world that
had to be the principle of the regulation, or adjustment rather, of the
exercise of power.
What I tried to show last year is that from the sixteenth and seven-
teenth century it does not seem that the exercise of power was adjusted
in accordance with wisdom, but according to calculation, that is to say,
the calculation of force, relations, wealth, and factors of strength. That is
to say, one no longer tries to peg government to the truth; one tries to
peg government to rationality. It seems to me that we could describe the
modern forms of governmental technology as control of government by
pegging it to rationality. Now, this adjustment to rationality—and again312
t h e b i rt h o f b i o p o l i t i c s
I am being very schematic—has taken two successive forms. The ration-
ality according to which power is regulated may take the form of the
rationality of the state understood as sovereign individuality. In this
case—this is the period of raison d’État—governmental rationality is the
rationality of the sovereign himself, of whomever it is who can say “me,
the state.” This obviously raises a number of problems. First of all, what
is this “me,” or alternatively, what is this “I” that identifies the ration-
ality of government with the rationality of a sovereign maximizing his
own power? And thus the juridical question of the contract arises.
There is also the factual question: How can this rationality of the sover-
eign who claims to say “I” be exercised with regard to problems like
those of the market or, more generally, economic processes in which
rationality not only completely dispenses with a unitary form but
absolutely excludes both the unitary form and the bird’s-eye view?
Hence there is a new problem, the transition to a new form of rational-
ity to which the regulation of government is pegged. It is now a matter
not of modeling government on the rationality of the individual sover-
eign who can say “me, the state,” [but] on the rationality of those who
are governed as economic subjects and, more generally, as subjects of
interest in the most general sense of the term. It is a matter of modeling
government [on] the rationality of individuals insofar as they employ a
certain number of means, and employ them as they wish, in order to sat-
isfy these interests in the general sense of the term: the rationality of the
governed must serve as the regulating principle for the rationality of
government. This, it seems to me, is what characterizes liberal rational-
ity: how to model government, the art of government, how to [found]*
the principle of rationalization of the art of government on the rational
behavior of those who are governed.
It seems to me that this is the important dividing point, the impor-
tant transformation which I have tried to localize, but which is far from
meaning that the rationality of state-individual or of the individual sov-
ereign who can say “me, the state” is abandoned. We can even say, in a
general, overall way, that the principle of rationality of all the nationalist
* M.F.: find4 April 1979
313
and statist politics will be pegged to the rationality or, if you prefer, in
other terms, to the interest and to the strategy of interests of the
individual sovereign, or of the state insofar as it constitutes a sovereign
individuality. Similarly, we can say that government regulated according
to the truth also has not disappeared. For after all, what in the end is
something like Marxism if not the pursuit of a type of governmentality
which will certainly be pegged to a rationality, but to a rationality which
is not the rationality of individual interests, but the rationality of his-
tory progressively manifesting itself as truth? You can see that in the
modern world, in the world we have known since the nineteenth cen-
tury, a series of governmental rationalities overlap, lean on each other,
challenge each other, and struggle with each other: art of government
according to truth, art of government according to the rationality of the
sovereign state, and art of government according to the rationality of eco-
nomic agents, and more generally, according to the rationality of the gov-
erned themselves. And it is all these different arts of government, all
these different types of ways of calculating, rationalizing, and regulating
the art of government which, overlapping each other, broadly speaking
constitute the object of political debate from the nineteenth century.
What is politics, in the end, if not both the interplay of these different
arts of government with their different reference points and the debate
to which these different arts of government give rise? It seems to me that
it is here that politics is born. Good, well that’s it. Thank you.*
* (A bit of a hubbub follows.) Foucault responds briefly to a number of isolated questions and
asks someone at some point if he has “any transcriptions of the lectures delivered last year and
in previous years,” “because,” he says, “I don’t have any.”314
t h e b i rt h o f b i o p o l i t i c s
1. John Locke, The Second Treatise of Government, ch. 7, “Of Political or Civil Society” in Two
Treatises of Government, ed. Peter Laslett (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1960)
p. 361.
2. Adam Ferguson, An Essay on the History of Civil Society; French translation by C. Gautier,
Essai sur l’histoire de la société civile. As C. Gautier notes, the Essay is actually a considerably
expanded version of text written in 1755–56, but not published, with the title, Treatise on
Refinement.
3. On this point, see P. Rosanvallon, Le Capitalisme utopique (Paris: Le Seuil, 1979) pp. 68–69
(republished with the title Le Libéralisme économique. Histoire de l’idée de marché, Paris: Le
Seuil, 1989). Foucault acknowledged this “important book” in Spring 1979, in the Course
Summary (see below, p. 320), and perhaps he was familiar with its content when he was
giving these lectures.
4. A. Ferguson, An Essay on the History of Civil Society, p. 4: “Mankind are to be taken in
groupes, as they have always subsisted.”
5. Ibid. p. 6: “With [man] the society appears to be as old as the individual, and the use of
the tongue as universal as that of the hand or the foot.”
6. Ibid., p. 4: “The history of the individual is but a detail of the sentiments and thoughts he
has entertained in the view of this species: and every experiment relative to this subject
should be made with entire societies, not with single men. We have every reason, however,
to believe, that in the case of such an experiment made, we shall suppose, with a colony of
children transplanted from the nursery, and left to form a society apart, untaught, and
undisciplined, we should only have the same things repeated, which, in so many different
parts of the earth, have been transacted already. The members of our little society would
feed and sleep, would herd together and play, would have a language of their own, would
quarrel and divide, would be to one another the most important objects of the scene, and,
in the ardour of their friendships and competitions, would overlook their personal danger,
and suspend the care of their self-preservation.”
7. Ibid., p. 8: “If we are asked, therefore, Where the state of nature is to be found? we may
answer, It is here; and it matters not whether we are understood to speak in the island of
Great Britain, at the Cape of Good Hope, or the Straits of Magellan. While this active
being is in the train of employing his talents, and of operating on the subjects around him,
all situations are equally natural.”
8. Ibid.
9. Ibid.
10. Ibid., pp. 58: “if the public good be the principal object with individuals, it is likewise
true, that the happiness of individuals is the great end of civil society: for in what sense can
a public enjoy any good, if its members, considered apart, be unhappy?”
11. Ibid., pp. 57–58: “[Man] must forgo his happiness and his freedom, where these interfere
with the good of society. He is only part of the whole; and the praise we think due to his
virtue, is but a branch of that more general commendation we bestow on the member of a
body, on the part of a fabric or engine, for being well fitted to occupy its place, and to pro-
duce its effect.”
12. Ibid., p. 58. See above, note 10.
13. See Part One, section 3, “Of the principles of Union among Mankind” and section 4, “Of
the principles of War and Dissension.”
14. Ibid., p. 11: “[Man] has one set of dispositions which refer to his animal preservation, and
to the continuance of his race; another which lead to society, and by inlisting him on the
side of one tribe or community, frequently engage him in war and contention with the rest
of mankind.”
15. Ibid., p. 19: “Men are so far from valuing society on account of its mere external conve-
niences, that they are commonly most attached where those conveniences are least frequent;
and are there most faithful, where the tribute of their allegiance is paid in blood.”
16. Ibid., p. 19. The sentence continues: “and he deals with them as he does with his cattle and
his soil, for the sake of the profits they bring.”
17. Ibid., p. 63: “Prior to any political institution whatever, men are qualified by a great diver-
sity of talents, by a different tone of the soul, and ardour of the passions, to act a variety of4 April 1979
18.
19.
20.
21.
22.
23.
24.
25.
26.
27.
28.
29.
30.
315
parts. Bring them together, each will find his place. They censure or applaud in a body;
they consult and deliberate in more select parties; they take or give an ascendant as
individuals.”
Ibid., p. 63.
Ibid.
Ibid., p. 86: “Thus, without any settled form of government, or any bond of union, but
what resembled more the suggestion of instinct, than the invention of reason, they
conducted themselves with the concert, and the force of nations. Foreigners, without being
able to discover who is the magistrate, or in what manner the senate is composed, always
find a council with whom they may treat, or a band of warriors with whom they may fight.
Without police or compulsory laws, their domestic society is conducted with order, and the
absence of vicious dispositions, is a better security than any public establishment for the
suppression of crimes.”
Ibid., p. 122.
See Parts Two and Three. On these stages of social development, Foucault had read, in par-
ticular, R.L. Meek, Economics and Ideology and other essays (London: Chapman & Hall, 1967)
pp. 34–40.
An Essay, p. 81: “Of the nations who dwell in those, or any other of the less cultivated parts
of the earth, some intrust their subsistence chiefly to hunting, fishing, or the natural
produce of the soil. They have little attention to property, and scarcely any beginnings of
subordination or government.”
Ibid., p. 81: “Others having possessed themselves of herds, and depending for their provi-
sion on pasture, know what it is to be poor and rich. They know the relations of patron and
client, of servant and master, and suffer themselves to be classed according to their measures
of wealth.”
Ibid., p. 122. The final sentence concludes: “they arise long before the date of philosophy,
from the instincts, not from the speculations, of men.”
See the article by M. Riedel, “Gesellschaft bürgerliche” in O. Brunner, W. Conze,
R. Koselleck, eds., Geschichtliche Grundbegriffe (Stuttgart: E. Klett, 1975) t. 2, pp. 719–800,
which was used by Foucault.
Johann Heinrich Jung-Stilling (1740–1817), Die Grundlehre der Staatswirthschaft (Marbourg:
1792 [modern edition, Königstein/Ts: Scriptor-Verlag, 1978]) p. 680: “Das
gesellschaftliche Leben ist dreifach: 1) bezieht es sich auf die Famille oder auf das häusliche
Verhältnis, 2) auf das Zusammenwohnen der Hausväter oder auf die bürgerliche
Gesellschaft, und 3) auf das Verhältnis gegen die regierende Gewalt und ihre Gesetze, das
ist: auf die Staatsgesellschaft”; quoted by M. Riedel, “Gesellschaft bürgerliche” p. 753.
Carl Daniel Heinrich Bensen (1761–1805), System der reinen und angewandten Staatslehre für
Juristen und Kameralisten (Eerlangen: Palm, 1804) t. I: “Unsere Staaten und ihre Bewohner
haben nur allmählich ihre jetzige Form erhalten. Von der häuslichen Gesellschaft rückte
nämlich das Menschengeschlecht zur bürgerlichen und von dieser zur Staatsgesellshaft
fort”; quoted by M. Riedel, “Gesellschaft bürgerliche” p. 754.
August Ludwig von Schlözer (1735–1809), Stats-Anzeigen (Göttingen: 1792) t. 17, p. 354:
“Alle bisher bekannt gewordene Menschenhaufen alter, mittler und neuer Zeiten, leben
in den 3 Arten häuslicher Gesellschaft. Alle ohne Ausnahme alle, leben in bürgerlicher
Gesellschaft. Und bei weitem die allermeisten, wenngleich nicht alle, leben in Staats-
Gesellschaft, oder unter Obrigkeit”; quoted by M. Riedel, “Gesellschaft bürgerliche”
p. 754. See also, G. Gurvitch, Traité de sociologie (Paris: PUF, 1958) pp. 31–32, consulted by
Foucault: “The followers of Leibniz—Nettelbladt in particular—in simplifying his ideas,
will distinguish regimen societatis, or bloc of varied groups of activity, preferably economic,
from regimen civitatis or bloc of local groups culminating in the state. This was the source
of the opposition between civil and economic society (bürgerliche Gesellschaft) and the
state. Formulated for the first time by the German historian and statistician,
A.L. Schlötzer, this opposition was the object of meditation for a number of German,
French, and British thinkers in the second half of the eighteenth and the first half of the
nineteenth century.”
G.W.F. Hegel, Grundlinien der Philosophie des Rechts, 3rd Part, 2nd section, §182–256 (Berlin:
Librairie Nicolaï, 1821); French translation by R. Derathé, Principes de la philosophie du droit316
t h e b i rt h o f b i o p o l i t i c s
(Paris: Vrin, 1975) pp. 215–217; English translation by T.M. Knox, Hegel’s Philosophy of
Right (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1967) pp. 122–155. See M. Riedel, “Gesellschaft
bürgerliche” pp. 779–783, as well as J. Hyppolite, “La conception hégélienne de l’État,”
Cahiers internationaux de sociologie, 1947, t. II, p. 146, and B. Quelquejeu, La Volonté dans la
philosophie de Hegel (Paris: Le Seuil, 1973), which are referred to in Foucault’s notes.
31. T. Paine, Common Sense Addressed to the Inhabitants of America (Philadelphia: W. & T. Bradford,
1776; Peterborough, Ontario/Plymouth: Broadview Editions, 2004) p. 47. See
H.K. Girvetz, From Wealth to Welfare (Stanford, California: Stanford University Press,
1950) p. 44, that Foucault read in preparation for this lecture, and P. Rosanvallon, Le
Capitalisme utopique, p. 144. Although Thomas Paine (1737–1809) was in fact of British
origin, we should make it clear that Common Sense was published fourteen months after his
settlement in America and that the book, written at the request of Benjamin Franklin,
expressed the aspirations of the American people at the beginning of the War of
Independence.
32. See “Il faut défendre la société” lecture of 10 March 1976, pp. 193–212; “Society Must Be
Defended” pp. 215–238.Course Summary*
THIS YEAR’S COURSE ENDED up being devoted entirely to what
should have been only its introduction. The theme was to have been
“biopolitics,” by which I meant the attempt, starting from the eighteenth
century, to rationalize the problems posed to governmental practice by
phenomena characteristic of a set of living beings forming a population:
health, hygiene, birthrate, life expectancy, race ... We know the increasing
importance of these problems since the nineteenth century, and the
political and economic issues they have raised up to the present.
It seemed to me that these problems were inseparable from the frame-
work of political rationality within which they appeared and took on their
intensity. This means “liberalism,” since it was in relation to liberalism that
they assumed the form of a challenge. How can the phenomena of “popu-
lation,” with its specific effects and problems, be taken into account in a
system concerned about respect for legal subjects and individual free enter-
prise? In the name of what and according to what rules can it be managed?
The debate that took place in England in the middle of the nineteenth cen-
tury concerning public health legislation is an example of this.
What should we understand by “liberalism”? I relied on Paul Veyne’s
reflections concerning historical universals and the need to test a
* Published in the Annuaire du Collège de France, 78 e année. Histoire des systèmes de pensée, année
1977–1978, (1978), pp. 445–449, and in Dits et écrits, 1954–1988, eds. D. Defert and F. Ewald,
with the collaboration of J. Lagrange (Paris: Gallimard, 1994), vol. 3, pp. 719–723. An alter-
native translation of this summary by Robert Hurley appears in M. Foucault, The Essential318
t h e b i rt h o f b i o p o l i t i c s
nominalist method in history. And continuing with previous
methodological decisions, I tried to analyze “liberalism,” not as a theory
or an ideology, and even less, obviously, as a way in which “society” “rep-
resents itself,” but as a practice, that is to say, a “way of doing things”
directed towards objectives and regulating itself by continuous reflection.
Liberalism, then, is to be analyzed as a principle and method of the ration-
alization of the exercise of government, a rationalization which obeys—
and this is what is specific about it—the internal rule of maximum
economy. While any rationalization of the exercise of government aims to
maximize its effects whilst reducing its costs as much as possible (in the
political as well as economic sense of costs), liberal rationalization starts
from the premise that government (not “government” as an institution,
obviously, but as the activity that consists in governing people’s conduct
within the framework of, and using the instruments of, a state) cannot be
its own end. Its raison d’être is not found in itself, and even under the best
possible conditions the maximization of government should not be its
regulative principle. In this respect, liberalism breaks with the “raison
d’État” that, from the end of the sixteenth century, sought in the exis-
tence and strengthening of the state the end which could justify an
expanding governmentality and regulate its development. The
Polizeiwissenschaft developed by the Germans in the eighteenth century—
either because they lacked a large state form, or also because the limited
scale of their territorial divisions gave them access to units that were
much more easy to examine with the technical and conceptual instru-
ments of the time—always followed the principle: Not enough attention
is being given to things, too much escapes control, too many domains lack
rules and regulation, order and administration are lacking. In short, there
is too little government. Polizeiwissenschaft is the form taken by a govern-
mental technology dominated by the principle of raison d’État, and in a
way it is “quite natural” that it take into account problems of population,
which, from the point of view of the state’s strength, must be as large and
as active as possible: health, birth rate, and hygiene find an important
place here without any problem.
Works of Michel Foucault, 1954–1984, Vol. 1: Ethics: subjectivity and truth, ed. Paul Rabinow, trans.
Robert Hurley and others (New York: New Press, 1997) pp. 73–79.Course Summary
319
Liberalism, on the other hand, is imbued with the principle: “One
always governs too much”—or at least, one should always suspect that
one governs too much. Governmentality should not be exercised without
a “critique” far more radical than a test of optimization. It should not
only question itself about the best (or least costly) means for achieving
its effects, but also about the possibility and even legitimacy of its pro-
ject for achieving effects. The question behind the suspicion that there
is always the risk of governing too much is: Why, after all, is it necessary
to govern? Hence the fact that the liberal critique is not really separate
from a problematic, new at the time, of “society”: it is by reference to
the latter that one will try to ascertain why government is necessary, in
what respects it can be dispensed with, and in what areas its interven-
tions are pointless or harmful. The rationalization of governmental prac-
tice in terms of raison d’État implied its optimization under optimal
conditions insofar as the state’s existence immediately presupposes the
exercise of government. Liberal thought does not start from the exis-
tence of the state, finding in government the means for achieving that
end that the state would be for itself; it starts instead from society,
which exists in a complex relation of exteriority and interiority vis-à-vis
the state. It is society—as both condition and final end—that makes it
possible to no longer ask: How can one govern as much as possible at the
least possible cost? Instead, the question becomes: Why must one gov-
ern? That is to say: What makes government necessary, and what ends
must it pursue with regard to society in order to justify its own exis-
tence? It is the idea of society which permits the development of a tech-
nology of government based on the principle that it is already in itself
“too much,” “excessive”—or at least that it is added as a supplement
whose necessity and usefulness can and must always be questioned.
Instead of turning the distinction between the state and civil society
into an historical universal enabling us to examine every concrete
system, we may try to see in it a form of schematization peculiar to a
particular technology of government.
So, we cannot say that liberalism is an always unrealized utopia—unless
one takes the kernel of liberalism to be the projections it has been led to320
t h e b i rt h o f b i o p o l i t i c s
formulate by its analyses and criticisms. It is not a dream that comes up
against a reality and fails to insert itself within it. It constitutes—and this
is the reason for both its polymorphism and its recurrences—a tool for the
criticism of reality: criticism of a previous governmentality from which one
is trying to get free; of a present governmentality that one is trying to
reform and rationalize by scaling it down; or of a governmentality to which
one is opposed and whose abuses one wants to limit. So, in different but
simultaneous forms, it will be possible to find liberalism both as a regula-
tive schema of governmental practice and as a sometimes radical opposi-
tional theme. This multiple use of liberalism is a highly characteristic
feature of English political thought at the end of the eighteenth and in the
first half of the nineteenth century. And this is especially so in the case of
the developments or ambiguities of Bentham and the Benthamites.
The market as reality and political economy as theory both certainly
played an important role in the liberal critique. However, as Pierre
Rosanvallon’s important book has confirmed, liberalism is neither their
consequence nor their development. 1 Rather, the market’s role in the lib-
eral critique has been that of a “test,” of a privileged site of experiment
in which one can pinpoint the effects of excessive governmentality and
take their measure: the aim of the analysis of the mechanisms of “dearth,”
or of the mid-eighteenth century grain trade more generally, was to show
the point at which governing was always governing too much. Whether it
is a matter of the physiocrats’ Table or of Smith’s “invisible hand,” that
is to say, of an analysis aiming to make the formation of value and the cir-
culation of wealth visible—in the form of “evidence”—or, on the con-
trary, of an analysis which presupposes that the connection between the
individual pursuit of profit and the growth of collective wealth is intrin-
sically invisible, in any case economics shows a fundamental incompati-
bility between the optimal development of the economic process and a
maximization of governmental procedures. This, more than through the
interplay of notions, was how eighteenth century French or English econ-
omists broke with mercantilism and cameralism; they freed reflection on
economic practice from the hegemony of raison d’État and from saturation
by governmental intervention. By using it as the measure of “too much
government” they placed it “at the limit” of governmental action.Course Summary
321
Undoubtedly liberalism does not derive from juridical thought any
more than it does from an economic analysis. It is not born from the
idea of a political society founded on a contractual bond. Rather, in the
search for a liberal technology of government, it emerged that the
juridical form was a far more effective instrument of regulation than
the wisdom or moderation of governors. (Due to their mistrust of law
and the juridical institution, the physiocrats were more inclined to seek
this regulation in the recognition, by a despot with institutionally
unlimited powers, of the “natural” laws of the economy which are
imposed on him as evident truth.) Regulation has not been sought in
the “law” because of the supposedly natural legalism of liberalism, but
because the law defines forms of general intervention excluding partic-
ular, individual, and exceptional measures, and because participation
of the governed in drawing up the law in a parliamentary system is the
most effective system of governmental economy. The État de droit, the
Rechtsstaat, the Rule of law, and the organization of a “truly representa-
tive” parliamentary system were therefore closely bound up with liber-
alism throughout the early nineteenth century, but just as political
economy, employed first of all as a criterion of excessive governmental-
ity, was not liberal either by virtue or nature, and even quickly led to
anti-liberal attitudes (such as nineteenth century Nationalökonomie or
twentieth century economic planning), so too democracy and the Rule
of law have not necessarily been liberal, and nor has liberalism been
necessarily democratic or bound to the forms of law.
So, rather than a more or less coherent doctrine or a politics pursu-
ing some more or less precise aims, I would be inclined to see in liberal-
ism a form of critical reflection on governmental practice. This criticism
may come from within or outside governmental practice, and it may be
based on this or that economic theory or refer to this or that legal sys-
tem without any necessary and one-to-one connection. The question of
liberalism, understood as a question of “too much government,” has
been one of the constant dimensions of that recent European phenome-
non which seems to have emerged first of all in England, namely: “polit-
ical life.” It is even one of its constituent elements, if it is true that
political life exists when the possible excess of governmental practice is322
t h e b i rt h o f b i o p o l i t i c s
limited by the fact that it is the object of public debate regarding its
“good or bad,” its “too much or too little.”
Of course, this is not an “interpretation” of liberalism that would claim
to be exhaustive, but a possible level of analysis, that of “governmental
reason,” of those types of rationality that are implemented in the meth-
ods by which human conduct is directed through a state administration.
I have tried to carry out this kind of analysis on two contemporary
examples: German liberalism of the years 1948–1962, and the American
liberalism of the Chicago School. In both cases, liberalism arose in a very
precise context as a critique of the irrationality peculiar to excessive
government, and as a return to a technology of frugal government, as
Franklin would have said.
This excess was represented in Germany by the war regime, by
Nazism, but, beyond that, it was a type of directed and planned econ-
omy that was the outcome of the 1914–1918 period and the general
mobilization of resources and men; it was also “state socialism.” In fact,
the German liberalism of the years after the Second World War was
defined, programmed, and even to some extent applied by men who,
from the years 1928–1930, belonged to the Freiburg School (or who
were at least inspired by it) and who later expressed their point of view
in the journal Ordo. At the point of intersection of neo-Kantian phil-
osophy, Husserl’s phenomenology, and Max Weber’s sociology, close on
some points to the Viennese economists, and mindful of the correl-
ation between economic processes and legal structures apparent in his-
tory, men like Eucken, W. Röpke, Franz Böhm, and von Rüstow
advanced their criticisms on three different political fronts: Soviet
socialism, National Socialism, and Keynesian interventionist policies.
But they addressed themselves to what they considered to be a single
adversary: a type of economic government that systematically ignores
the market mechanisms that alone can ensure regulation of the forma-
tion of prices. Working on the fundamental themes of the liberal tech-
nology of government, ordoliberalism tried to define what a marketCourse Summary
323
economy could be, organized (but not planned or directed) within an
institutional and legal framework, which, on the one hand, would offer
the guarantees and limitations of the law, and, on the other, would
ensure that the freedom of economic processes did not produce any
social distortion. The first part of the course was devoted to the study
of this ordoliberalism which inspired the economic choice of the gen-
eral policy of the German Federal Republic at the time of Adeneuer and
Ludwig Erhard.
The second part was devoted to a few aspects of what is called
American neo-liberalism. This is generally grouped under the Chicago
School which also developed in reaction to the “too much government”
which, since Simons, was represented in its eyes by the New Deal, war-
time planning, and the big economic and social programs mostly
supported by post-war Democratic administrations. As with the
German ordoliberals, criticism made in the name of economic liberal-
ism is justified by the danger represented by the inevitable sequence:
economic interventionism, inflation of governmental apparatuses, over-
administration, bureaucracy, rigidification of all the power mech-
anisms, and, at the same time, the production of new economic
distortions, which would lead to new interventions. However, what
aroused the attention of this American neo-liberalism is a movement
which is the complete opposite of that found in the German social mar-
ket economy: while the latter considers regulation of prices by the
market—the only basis for a rational economy—to be so fragile in itself
that it must be supported, managed, and “ordered” by an internal and
vigilant policy of social interventions (involving assistance to the
unemployed, health care cover, a housing policy, etcetera), American
neo-liberalism seeks instead to extend the rationality of the market, the
schemas of analysis it offers and the decision-making criteria it sug-
gests, to domains which are not exclusively or not primarily economic:
the family and the birth rate, for example, or delinquency and penal
policy.
What should now be studied, therefore, is the way in which the spe-
cific problems of life and population have been posed within a technol-
ogy of government which, although far from always having been liberal,324
t h e b i rt h o f b i o p o l i t i c s
since the end of the eighteenth century has been constantly haunted by
the question of liberalism.
This year the seminar was devoted to the crisis of juridical thought in
the last years of the nineteenth century. Papers were given by François
Ewald (on civil law), Catherine Mevel (on public and administrative
law), Éliane Allo (on the right to life in legislation concerning chil-
dren), Nathalie Coppinger and Pasquale Pasquino (on penal law),
Alessandro Fontana (on security measures), François Delaporte and
Anne-Marie Moulin (on police and health policy).Course Summary
325
1. P. Rosanvallon, Le Capitalisme utopique. Critique de l’idéologie économique (Paris: Le Seuil, 1979).This page intentionally left blankCourse Context
Michel Senellart*
FROM THE FIRST WEEK, these lectures appear as the direct
continuation of the previous year’s lectures. Stating his intention to con-
tinue what he had started to say the previous year, Foucault first of all
clarifies the choice of method that will govern his analysis 1 and then
summarizes the final lectures devoted to the government of raison d’État
and criticism of this in terms of the problem of grain. In the eighteenth
century, the principle of the external limitation of raison d’État by right
is replaced by a principle of internal limitation in the form of the econ-
omy. 2 Political economy, in fact, contains within itself the requirement of
a self-limitation of governmental reason founded on knowledge of the
natural course of things. It therefore marks the irruption of a new ration-
ality in the art of government: governing less, out of concern for maxi-
mum effectiveness, in accordance with the naturalness of the
phenomena one is dealing with. Foucault calls this government, which is
linked to the question of truth in its permanent effort of self-limitation,
“liberalism.” The object of the lectures is to show how this liberalism
constitutes the condition of intelligibility of biopolitics:
With the emergence of political economy, with the introduction of
the restrictive principle into governmental practice itself, an
* Michel Senellart is professor of political philosophy at the Lyon École normale supérieure des
lettres et sciences humaines. He is the author of Machiavélisme et Raison d’État (Paris: PUF,
1989) and Les Arts de gouverner (Paris: Le Seuil, 1995). He is also the translator of M. Stolleis,
Histoire du droit public en Allemagne, 1600–1800. Théorie du droit public et science de la police
(Paris: PUF, 1998).328
t h e b i rt h o f b i o p o l i t i c s
important substitution, or doubling rather, is carried out, since the
subjects of right on which political sovereignty is exercised appear as
a population that a government must manage.
This is the point of departure for the organizational line of a “bio-
politics.” But who does not see that this is only part of something
much larger, which [is] this new governmental reason?
Studying liberalism as the general framework of biopolitics. 3
The following plan is announced: to study liberalism first of all in its
original formulation and its contemporary, German and American, ver-
sions, and then come to the problem of the politics of life. 4 In actual fact,
only the first part of this program is realized, Foucault being led to
develop his analysis of German neo-liberalism at greater length than he
envisaged. 5 This interest in the social market economy is due not only to
the paradigmatic character of the German experience. It is also
explained by reasons of “critical morality,” faced with “that kind of lax-
ity” that, in his eyes, constitutes an “inflationist critique of the state”
that is quick to denounce fascism in the functioning of Western democ-
ratic states. 6 The “German question” is thus placed at the heart of the
methodological, historical, and political questions that form the frame-
work of the course.
The second and third lectures (17 and 24 January) are devoted to the
specific features of the liberal art of government as outlined in the
eighteenth century. In the first place, in these lectures Foucault explains
the link between truth and liberal governmentality through an analysis
of the market as a site of veridiction, and he specifies the modalities of
internal limitation that derive from this. Thus he reveals two ways of
limiting public power corresponding to two heterogeneous conceptions
of liberty: the revolutionary, axiological way, which founds sovereign
power on the rights of man, and the radical, utilitarian way, which starts
from governmental practice in order to define the limit of governmental
competence and the sphere of individual autonomy in terms of utility.
These two ways are distinct, but they are not mutually exclusive; the his-
tory of European liberalism since the nineteenth century should be stud-
ied in the light of their strategic interaction. It is also this interaction thatCourse Context
329
clarifies, or puts in perspective, the way in which, from 1977, Foucault
problematizes the “rights of the governed,” in comparison with the
more vague and abstract invocation of “human rights.” 7
After having examined the question of Europe and of its relations
with the rest of the world according to the new governmental reason, in
the third lecture Foucault returns to his choice of calling “liberalism”
what in the eighteenth century appears rather as a naturalism. The word
liberalism is justified by the role liberty plays in the liberal art of
government: a liberty no doubt guaranteed, but also produced by this
art of government, which, in order to achieve its ends, needs continually
to create, maintain, and frame it. Liberalism can thus be defined as the
calculation of risk—the free play of individual interests—compatible
with the interest of each and all. That is why the incitement to “live
dangerously” entails the establishment of multiple mechanisms of secu-
rity. Liberty and security: it is the procedures of control and forms of
state intervention required by this double exigency that constitute the
paradox of liberalism and are at the origin of the “crises of governmen-
tality” 8 that it has experienced for two centuries.
The question now then is whether that crisis of governmentality
characterizes the present world and to what revisions of the liberal art
of government it has given rise. Starting from the fourth lecture
(31 January 1979), the study of the two great neo-liberal schools,
German ordoliberalism 9 and American anarcho-liberalism, 10 corre-
spond to this diagnostic task and is Foucault’s sole incursion into the
field of contemporary history throughout his teaching at the Collège de
France. These two schools do not just participate in an identical project
of the radical reform of liberalism. They also represent two distinct forms
of the “critique of the irrationality peculiar to excessive government,” 11
one stressing the logic of pure competition on the economic terrain, while
framing the market through a set of state interventions (theory of the
“policy of society”), and the other seeking to extend the rationality of the
market to domains hitherto considered to be non-economic (theory of
“human capital”).
The final two lectures deal with the birth in eighteenth century
thought of the idea of homo œconomicus as a subject of interest distinct330
t h e b i rt h o f b i o p o l i t i c s
from the subject of right, and of the notion of “civil society” as correla-
tive of the liberal technology of government. Whereas in its most classi-
cal version liberal thought opposed society to the state, as nature to
artifice or spontaneity to constraint, Foucault highlights the paradox
that constitutes their relation. Society, in fact, represents the principle
in the name of which liberal government tends to limit itself. It obliges
it to ask itself constantly whether it is not governing too much and, in
this respect, plays a critical role with regard to all excessive government.
But it also forms the target of a permanent governmental intervention,
not in order to restrict formal liberties on the level of practical reality,
but in order to produce, multiply, and guarantee those liberties that
the liberal system needs. 12 Society thus represents at once “the set of
conditions of least liberal government” and the “surface of transfer of
governmental activity.”